Unknown Speaker  0:00  
Am getting there it goes.

Unknown Speaker  0:09  
Good morning everyone. Thank you for joining us. We're letting everyone come in to the room. It takes a little while, but we're really excited to have you with us.

Unknown Speaker  0:22  
I thank you very much.

Unknown Speaker  0:24  
For all

Speaker 1  0:26  
we're delighted to have our speaker and discussant today. Dr Steve COVID will be the discussant, and as you all know, Dr Jeffrey Schweitzer will be our speaker. I'm not going to belabor this to give everyone time to talk and we'll have fruitful discussion afterwards. So I'm going to turn it over you to you Steve, to provide our introduction and follow up with Dr Schweitzer,

Unknown Speaker  0:59  
yes, hi everyone. I hope you can hear me well

Speaker 2  1:03  
for me to be here with you all and introduce Dr Schweitzer. Dr Schweitzer has his MD and PhD degree Harvard Medical School of Arts and Sciences, where he did his research in developmental biology. He trains in neurosurgical. Neurosurgical training was at UCLA, and he did a fellowship in functional neurosurgery Yale, Connecticut, and he's been practicing this for for many years. Currently, he's the associate professor of neurosurgery at Harvard Medical School at the Massachusetts General Hospital, and he specializes in functional neurosurgery, and he's the co founder of the interprofessional facial pain program at Massachusetts General Hospital. So it's a pleasure to be here and to introduce Dr Schweitzer, thank

Unknown Speaker  1:55  
you very much.

Speaker 3  1:57  
Dr scarwani, thank you very much for that kind introduction, and it's a pleasure for me to be here today, in spite of the northeaster that we're having fuel technical difficulties. Just a reminder to everyone, if you're not talking, to make sure that your phone is or your audio is muted. I'm going to start by reminding everyone that the number one predictor of a good surgical outcome is patient selection and in the management of facial pain that we're going to talk about today, with an emphasis on trigeminal neuralgia, that means that getting the proper diagnosis matched to the proper treatment is critical. With that in mind, people of a certain age, you trained at a certain time, will remember this mantra that was drilled into us, that pain is the fifth vital sign, and it took many years for the field as a whole to come to grips with the fact that pain is not the fifth vital sign, and that when a patient comes in whose main complaint is pain, We have the difficulty of depending on a patient's history and description of what they're feeling as the primary means of making a diagnosis, there is no good way to measure pain the way you can measure blood pressure or blood chemistry. Most patients who come in with facial pain will naturally attribute it to an identifiable cause, usually Dental in the case of facial pain, it is very, very rare for someone to come to see me with trigeminal neuralgia who has not been to a dentist. And in fact, it's quite rare for people to come see me who've not had root canals and teeth pulled, and this is no aspersion on the dentists for most of human history, it was not clear that pain in the face, what we would now call teregeminal neuralgia, was really something different than dental Pain. The history of trigeminal just kind of interesting. Dr David Keith pointed out in his talk that the very first article and the very first issue of what is now the New England Journal of Medicine was about trigeminal neuralgia. This has been around for as long as as human beings have been around, but our understanding of it is really only 150 200 years old, and our experience in managing it surgically is even younger than that. So to give a little bit of a review of what Dr Chang mentioned last week, picking out this diagnosis based on history is very difficult to do, and this slide is just intended to give a little bit of an idea of some of the complexity of arriving at a firm diagnosis of trigeminal neuralgia. So on the upper right, we have this very complicated hierarchy of all the different factors that can cause pain referred to the head and face. In case, there's a more focused list of of decision options down here on the lower right, and I find the one on the left here, a particularly useful decision tree differentiating between chronic, continuous pain and episodic pain, episodic unilateral pain, and finally, a way of coming to the diagnosis of probable trigeminal neuralgia.

Unknown Speaker  5:33  


Speaker 3  5:37  
Over here,for dentists in particular, there are decision trees that lead to excluding all other causes of dental pain and ending up with this final recommendation, which, which I think is a good one as a take home message, if it's not clearly Dental, the next step should be to order an MRI of the brain and refer the patient appropriately. So again, just for to review a little bit of what we've heard in previous talks here, including last week with Dr Chang, common underlying conditions that can cause facial pain, dental sinuses, tumors in various locations, intracranial causes of facial pain. We're going to talk about a little bit more today. There's something called secondary trigeminal neuralgia, which is caused by a mass such as a tumor or an aneurysm. It's really not ideologically different than then. Then the type of trigeminal neuralgia we consider classic, anything that causes compression of the nerve will cause this, but we kind of separate mass lesions from the classic things that we'll talk about more today. And then there's a problem of referred pain from inside the head in other places. So again, to sum up, the symptoms can be very difficult to tease out and separate from other causes of pain. When we're talking about facial pain and trigeminal neuralgia, and we are dependent on the history of patient, because there's no real, accurate, reliable test to prove this diagnosis. There some have been proposed, but none are in general use, because none are really as reliable as a careful history the two people who historically are responsible for the beginning of our modern understanding of trigeminal neuralgia are these two. You can imagine getting ready to go to work in the morning, and having to do that to your powdered wig and so on, is really pretty amazing. This is Nicola Andre on the left, who is responsible for the name that is commonly used for this disease, titular and on the right, John Fothergill, who Dr Keith talked about a little bit in his lecture, who was a friend of Benjamin Franklin, who really was the first person to ascribe trigeminal neuralgia, and This type of facial pain to the nerves, and understand this as a nerve problem rather than a tooth problem. And that is really where our understanding began with this, leading to that article in the New England Journal that we looked at before and the treatment of patients at that time. I'm having a little bit of trouble here with my pointer. There we go. So how common is this disease? How likely are you to see it in a dental practice or a headache practice? It is actually quite a common problem, and I think it often goes unrecognized for many years as what it is, one of the reasons that many people spend long periods of time getting dental treatment before the realization is reached that this there's that this is what's actually going on. It is more common to women over the age of 40 overall present. The prevalence of this disease is as much as about one in 200 people, and it usually occurs in the lower part of the face. We'll go back in a moment into trigeminal anatomy, but in the upper or lower jaw, again, one of the reasons it is conflated with tooth pain, so a common problem and something that should be high on one's list when dealing with episodic face pain that seems to be resistant to obvious treatments. Just a refresher on the anatomy of the trigeminal nerve. The name three roots refers to the three divisions. So here you see the gasserian ganglion. Now, this is a this is a sensory ganglion. This nerve is very analogous to the dorsal root ganglia, and that the dorsal sensory nerves in the spinal canal, and like those, there are primary sensory neurons here. The anatomy and neurochemistry of this ganglion are very complex. There are many different neurotransmitters here, including things like glutamate, substance, P, C, G. ERP, and it's actually relatively poorly understood exactly what goes on in this ganglion. A number of fibers pass right through it on the way to the brain. But for our purposes, in discussing diagnosis and treatment of pain, it's important to understand that there are three main branches, the first division, which is the which is the ophthalmic branch, second division, maxillary and the third division, which is the mandibular branch. The nerve also has a complex supply to parts of the ear, which you see here, the auricular temple, temporal nerve, auricular, but is the purple area greater auricular nerve. So the upper part here is supplied by trigeminal nerve, but other nerves from the occipital branch of the occipital nerve serve other parts of the ear, and yet other parts are subserved by the vagus nerve. So ear pain is a particularly thorny problem many of these patients with facial pain, complaint of pain that radiates from the ear or is in the ear. And again, it can be difficult for the patients to distinguish exactly where the pain is originating and where it radiates to here. Again, you see the fifth nerve, the trigeminal nerve. It supplies this anterior part of the ear canal and the eardrum, the tympanic membrane here, but other nerves are involved in other places it it's interesting to note that these are mixed nerves, just like nerves in the spinal canal. So even though we generally think of the seventh nerve, facial nerve, as motor and the fifth nerve as sensory. The facial nerve has a small sensory branch and the fifth nerve has a small motor branch, which we'll see again momentarily. Within this area of trigeminal neuralgia, there is sub classification. It gets even more complicated, because classically, we think of trigeminal neuralgia as a sudden electric shock, excruciating pain that shoots down into the the upper or lower jaw, and then when it's gone, it's gone, and people are normal in between that is kind of classic, or also called type one trigeminal neuralgia. That's what we all read about in textbooks, and what we think of when in neurology and neurosurgery is trigeminal neuralgia. But it isn't always that way. It's more complicated than that. There is a second type of trigeminal neuralgia, which has the same apparent origin and etiology, which is a more constant, steady background pain. And patients have mixtures of these two. It's rare to see someone who has purely only the classic type one. So some of these decision trees are based on the idea that you either have one or the other. And if it's just the lancinating electric shock pain, we call that type one. If it's just the background pain, we call that either type two or atypical trigeminal neuralgia. But here's a classification on the left from Kim Burchill, a neurosurgeon at the Oregon Health Sciences University who bases it on predominance. So if it's more than 50% of the lancinating type, he will call that type one, more than 50% constant pain. It's type two. Another very important thing to keep in mind here is that the character of the pain can change over time, and that, especially with medication and treatment, people have a tendency to evolve from the pure, lancinating type pain to more and more of the background, steady pain in between These episodes, some patients will also complain of a subjective feeling of numbness there. So generally, as a as a sort of ballpark overview of this type one is this lancinating electric shock, excruciating pain, and type two is a more dull background pain that's there all the time. They are usually mixed together. This is also important in seeing patients and counseling them, because the electric shock landscaping, the type one symptoms, tend to respond much better to surgery. 

Speaker 3  14:35  
Now we heard a little bit of one more point I wanted to make here is that when pain is in the ear, I mentioned it's complex. One of the reasons I showed the slide about when you go through all the dental causes, send the patient for an MRI, you pick up some weird things on MRI scans that can be helpful. Obviously, if we have a tumor like a meningioma or an aneurysm, pressing. In the nerve those things are important to know about because of their own prognostic implications, but even in looking for the source of pain, here's a patient we saw who complained mainly of ear pain. It did radiate into the face, but it was mainly localized to the ear canal. Little bit unusual for trigeminal neuralgia, what this patient has what you're seeing here. This is left and right. This is the pons the brain stem. And what the arrow is pointing to is a loop of the anterior inferior cerebellar artery that's pressing on the seventh and eighth nerve complex as it goes into the internal auditory canal. This nerve is pressing on the nervous intermedius, which is the sensory branch of the facial nerve. And this is called nervous intermedius neuralgia. So you know, the the imaging is a very helpful thing to do now, before we go on about etiology. So you know, why are we talking about surgery at all? When we had a talk last week about all the different effective means of medical control of this disease, we consider surgery for this in two circumstances, either the medication doesn't work, or, number two, the medication works, but the side effects are intolerable, or both. When patients come in and say, you know, my pain is completely under control, but I just don't like taking pills. I discourage people in that situation from pursuing surgery if they do want to pursue it. I make it very, very clear that the goal is no pain, not no pills. Because what I'm going to go on and show you here is that this is a complex disease, that surgery is very helpful, that it has risks and it is not a perfect solution for everybody at this stage, if someone decides to go on to surgery, we need to understand what the etiology is of this disease to help us design A treatment that works best for each individual patient. So what is the cause of trigeminal neuralgia? We've talked a little bit about things pressing on the nerve. Here's one pressing on another nerve. I'll show you the more classic findings of an MRI of patients with trigeminal neuralgia in a moment. But the answer is, we don't really understand this disease very well. There are a lot of theories. Most of them are just that. They're hypotheses. They're very difficult to prove. It's circumstantial evidence. We don't have a lot of pathological specimens. There are not a lot of controlled trials of different things with this disease, and we, above all, don't have a good animal model of trigeminal neuralgia. There are models that depend on artificially injuring the trigeminal nerve in rabbits, rats and so forth. That's not quite the same thing as trigeminal neuralgia. Looking through the veterinary literature, there is something called trigeminal mediated head shaking, which occurs in horses, but it's it's movement, that it's head shaking, it's not obvious that it's pain, and it's not associated with what I'm showing you here, demyelination. So we don't have a good animal model. And I you know people say, Well, how would you know if the animals in pain? If you see a patient with classic type one trigeminal neuralgia walk into your office, and you can, you can see when they have an attack, these folks will stop speaking in the middle of a sentence and wince when they have an attack, it's, it's something that in an animal you'd be able to see, and there isn't anything comparable. So that hamstrings us a bit in working on solutions to this problem and even in understanding its underlying neurophysiology and neurochemistry. This is a hypothesis as to what's going on most people with classic trigeminal neuralgia appear to have demyelination near the area where the trigeminal nerve joins the brain stem at the root, area where peripheral type Schwann cell myelin gives way to Central oligodendroglio. Myelin seems to be a sensitive area. The idea is basically that this is a short circuit between the large myelinated fibers that subserve light touch and position and the small unmyelinated pain fibers. And that when the myelin is destroyed here, a couple of things happen. You can get direct spread of excitation between the axons here, from one to another, you can get abnormal sprouting and connections between the different types of fibers, and you can even, because of conduction block, because action potentials are blocked in this area, they can kind of reverberate and echo and cause abnormal pain signals. Mean, why is all this relevant? Well, anything that decreases flow of information through this area, that decreases neurological activity in this area, will decrease this abnormal signaling getting into the pain fibers. So what's happening here is things that should normally be sensed as light touch or position or movement are being sensed as pain instead. And if you can decrease the amount of that normal sensory information going up the wrong channel, that will help with the pain. Surgery is focused on solving that problem in a couple of ways, as as well about we're about to look at. So this is an actual pathology specimen from a patient, presumably post mortem with trigeminal neuralgia. The black is myelin. Brain stem is on this side. This is the nerve. And you see this area of extensive demyelination. So this is what this looks like under the microscope. There's also in some people. This is new information. This is a paper from last year by Dr Chris Colley, who's here at Mass General now showing that there are some people who have a predisposition based on certain mutations in GABA channels, both GABA neurotransmitter channels and ion channels, that seem to set them up to be more sensitive to this, and this perhaps explains the reason why we will see people who on MRI scan have things touching their trigeminal nerves, but have no symptoms from it, and also an observation that not most, But many people with trigeminal neuralgia, have other nerve pain syndromes as well. So clearly, there's a couple of things that can set people up. I'm about to show you some of them. And my own experience with this is that in some people, this is a three hit disease, you have a general susceptibility like this. You have the demyelination that I just showed you. And I think in some people, there's a match that sets off the powder keg, and in some cases, that may be the dental work, some initial trigger of the pain. So I don't think that it's always the case that people get root canals because there was a misdiagnosis. I think that happens. But I think in some people that pain from of dental origin may be what sets this all off, particularly if they have the other Double hits of the demyelination from compression and the genetic susceptibility. What else can cause demyelinization? Well, multiple sclerosis is a disease of the myelin, and indeed, in about 2% of multiple sclerosis patients, we have trigeminal neuralgia, often as a presenting symptom. This is an example of that. So it is. It is definitely more common in people with MS. This is a patient I saw recently, and what you're looking at here is an MRI focused on demyelination. These white areas on the MRI are Ms plaques in other parts of the brain, looking up from the feet left and right. Here you see an MS plaque in the pons on the opposite side. And here you see an MS plaque. This is exactly where the trigeminal nerve is joining the pons. And here on this you can see the demyelination, not only in the nerve, but where the nerve enters into the brainstem. Here, this patient had actually had surgery for this, which didn't really work, and came back to me for another procedure. But this can be extremely difficult to treat. Some of these short circuits in patients like this happen centrally after the different nerve fibers have diverged, making it more complicated, and some can have trigeminal neuralgia from far downstream up in the cortex. But again, something to think about because of the relatively high association of trigeminal neuralgia and Ms.

Speaker 3  24:07  
This is the Schweitzer hypothesis, which I have no idea how to test this, but an interesting observation, getting back to this note that this is a uniquely human disease. Why would that be? There is something else that is unique about anatomy in this part of the body in humans, and that is this basal angle of the skull, related to the fact that we walk upright. So in quadrupedal animals, this is flat, and the nerve would run straight like so in humans, there's a nearly right angle here, and the nerve has to negotiate this right angle. Now, keep in mind that MRI scans are done with patient lying flat, and you can imagine that when they sit up, things change, putting gravity to work here. You can see on the right here, these are primates, so from lemur to monkey to lesser apes to chimps and to humans. You see how this angle changes and. The lower left here. This is an MRI of patient. What you're seeing here, this is the pons. This white is spinal fluid. Black here is bone. This is the actual trigeminal nerve crossing over this space from the brain to the bone. This is the where the ganglion is. And you see how it's kind of suspended here on the asymptomatic side in this patient, it looks unencumbered on the right side, this is the superior cerebellar artery pushing down on the nerve right at that point. So one can speculate that the nerve is under tension, and, for that reason, more susceptible to compression. Here, again, this is my own hypothesis as to why this occurs just in humans. If anyone can think of a good way to test this, please let me know. But interesting to look at. Here's another example of the same thing. Patient that I have actually on the list for surgery at this point, you can kind of see the brain here. This is the trigeminal nerve. The arrows pointing to where that nerve is bowed by the superior cerebellar artery pushing down on it, and this pressure seems to cause demyelination, leading to the other symptoms. So there are really three ways to address this problem with surgery, and they fall into these three categories, corrective surgery designed at fixing the underlying problem. Ablative surgery, which is intentional infliction of some damage on the nerve, to try to block that traffic that's passing through the short circuit. And modulatory to try to modify that traffic in some way to help relieve the pain the historically original one is actually the corrective surgery. And this is one slide kind of giving a brief overview of the history of neurosurgical treatment of trigeminal neuralgia. This is Walter dandy, James Gardner, and this is Peter Janetta. These are three of the the Giants in this field. In the early part of the 20th century, there was the impression that trigeminal neuralgia and other types of facial pain were caused by nerve compression, and that this could be relieved by going in and and relieving that compression, and that was done by an open craniotomy, either in front of the ear, which is where the nerve enters the face through the bone here, where that trigeminal ganglion is located, or from the back of the head, going up to where the nerve exits from the brainstem and heads forward in the course of this, things were often found. The basic idea here was to cut the dura over this to free it up. And I think in some cases, the surgery caused enough damage to the nerve that basically it was the manipulation of the nerve that relieved the pain, rather than the decompression, per se. But the observation was made that sometimes things were pressing on the nerve, and in particular, Walter dandy made a note that he often found a blood vessel up against nerve. He was really looking for small tumors, aneurysms and other things, but he made that remark and didn't really follow up on it. James Gardner, who was chief of neurosurgeon Cleveland Clinic at the time, was the first to focus in on this vascular compression of cranial nerves as a cause, not only of trigeminal neuralgia, but also of Hemi facial spasm. When it was the seventh nerve involved and it was the first to publish on this, Peter genetta sort of made his reputation on this idea of microvascular decompression and microvascular or of blood vessel compression of cranial nerves as the etiology, not just of trigeminal neuralgia and any facial spasm, but even of things like essential hypertension and diabetes. So you know when, when you have the old saying, when you have a hammer, everything looks like a nail. Nonetheless, the disease or the procedure, the procedure, the that we use to correct the vascular compression, is often called the genetta procedure. Dr Janetta trained at UCLA about 12 years before I was there, and his teacher, Robert Rand, was still there when I was training. And if you called this the genetic procedure, in front of Robert Rand, he would just blow a gasket. He didn't invent it. It was Gardner who invented it. And indeed, if you look back, these are two articles in The Journal of neurosurgery. This is James Gardner from 1962 reporting on his experience of microvascular decompression, and in turn, interestingly, going back and quoting Walter dandy. So all three of those people I just showed you are in this slide as the the idea being that blood vessels compressing these nerves and causing. Demyelination, or the underlying etiology of these diseases. And this is Dr Janetta initial paper on this, which gained him that lifelong reputation.

Unknown Speaker  30:10  


Speaker 3  30:12  
So this procedure that's being described here, microvascular decompression, falls into that first category that I mentioned, the correct corrective, ablative and modulatory. This is a procedure that's designed to correct the underlying problem. If we think that the demyelination is being caused by compression by a blood vessel, you go in and you move the blood vessel, presumably allowing the nerve to heal and the myelin to regrow. What's interesting to keep in mind looking at the next few slides, though, is that the pain relief from this operation does not require the myelin to regrow, which presumably would take weeks or months. The pain relief occurs right away, and it is not clear why that happens again, having no model, we're not quite sure why pain is relieved immediately. It may be that handling the nerve is enough to cause damage to it and block signals. That's one idea that's called the micro rhizotomy effect idea. Some of my colleagues here disagree with that, and think that it is actually the blood vessel continuing to pulsate against the bare part of the nerve, the demyelinated part of the nerve, that's actually setting off action potentials, and that removing that pulsatility will quiet things down, but again, not Clear doesn't affect how we do the surgery. This is an example that I'm going to show you of an actual patient who came to see me in the office with refractory trigeminal neuralgia and and then ended up coming in on an emergency basis because his pain had simply become impossible to control. So we actually took him to the OR urgently, to do a microvascular decompression, which I'm about to show you in his MRI. Here you can see, this is his trigeminal nerve. This is the superior cerebellar artery from above, and the anterior inferior cerebellar artery from below. And you can see they're coming together on the nerve. You can almost see right there where the nerve is thinned out. And here's a coronal view of the same thing. What I'm going to show you here is the actual surgery that we did. I have about a two and a half minute video here, which we'll see if we can get to work.

Unknown Speaker  32:33  
And

Unknown Speaker  32:36  
let's see here,

Unknown Speaker  32:42  
I'm uh, not getting the video to work,

Speaker 3  32:48  
trying to get my laser pointer off.

Speaker 3  33:00  
Sorry about that. I'm not sure why this is not working.

Unknown Speaker  33:07  
Or check person on to comment,

Speaker 3  33:09  
yeah, it's not changing from the laser pointer. I'm trying to get the laser pointer

Unknown Speaker  33:15  
to turn off. Beth

Unknown Speaker  33:18  
or Mike, any comments on this?

Speaker 3  33:20  
If you could stop and reshare right from this slide, it'll probably start back up, stop and reshare. Okay, from this right from this slide,

Unknown Speaker  33:32  
all right, let's try that.

Unknown Speaker  33:39  
And I okay.

Speaker 3  33:44  
Now I see i My problem is that the laser pointer won't turn off. I'm trying to get rid of the laser pointer option, and it won't. It won't turn off Pointer Options. I'm

Unknown Speaker  34:03  
I try that, try that again. I just thought I saw something that said hidden, right where you just were. Yeah, maybe that's it. Let's see.

Speaker 3  34:17  
There we go. Great, fantastic. All right, so what you're looking at there. Thank you very much. That's the nerve here and now. Now, of course, I need now, I need the laser pointer. That's the nerve. And here's the anterior inferior cerebellar artery to the right, and the superior cerebellar artery on the left. And you can see, just like on the MRI scan, how the nerve is being squeezed between those two things. This craniotomy here is about the size of a nickel overall. And you can also see we're reaching down to cut the arachnoid membrane that's sort of binding these structures together.

Unknown Speaker  34:58  
Sorry, that you should. I have your presenter view, apologize.

Speaker 3  35:02  
Okay, again, I'm, I'm not sure. Okay, let me stop sharing and go back. Hang on for a moment. So somehow I need to, let's see share screen. I'm going to go to screen two, and there we go. Is that better? Okay, yep, you're okay. Now, okay, so what you're seeing here actually, you can see the motor route of the trigeminal right there. You can see the indentation in the nerve. Here's the artery, the superior cerebellar artery, and and here we are. You can see the artery is much smaller now that spasm from handling the artery. We'll get back to that at the end. This is a ball of Teflon fibers that we've made and pushing into place to keep that artery propped up away from the nerve, as well as away from the brain stem, so it's kind of wedged in the corner where the nerve joins the brainstem and held in place there by pressure from the nerve the artery and this arachnoid over it. You'll see, we're going to just open that arachnoid a little bit more here, and you can see to the left there, the view of the artery still, still up there, the dent in the nerve. Now we're going to go to the other side, the anterior inferior cerebellar artery. On this side, we actually put in two little pledges. That was the first one, second one going in here, and then from manipulation, both of these arteries are in a little bit of spasm. So the final step here, after we kind of irrigate everything out, is we're going to come in with a little Papaver, and which is a medication that will instantly reverse the spasm. And here we come with that squirting the pattern in there. And you can see the nerve now nicely padded on both sides, the arteries been pushed away from it. This patient left the hospital two days later, pain free. So these are very, very interesting looking and gratifying cases when you can do this because you've actually fixed the underlying problem. Sometimes that's not possible. Either it's a patient with MS, or there is no obvious nerve compressing it, or there are other reasons why people are not candidates for craniotomy. There are the people who prefer not to have a craniotomy. And then we turn to ablative strategies, which are designed to impede that traffic flow through the abnormal part of the nerve that can be done at the level of the ganglion, the sensory ganglion with heat, which is a radio frequency rhizotomy, with pressure, which is a balloon compression rhizotomy, or with glycerol injection, or it can be done at level of the root with radio surgery, which is external beams of radiation, a non invasive treatment of these glycerol is almost Never used anymore. It depended on positioning of the patient very heavily, and glycerol getting into the wrong place can be a bad thing. The other three are in active use here. Radio Frequency rhizotomy and balloon compression rhizotomy are both designed to impede traffic through the nerve, but they work through different means. So both of these involve placing a needle through the foramen o valley from the cheek. In the case of radio frequency rhizotomy, we're coagulating part of the nerve, and so we first have to map it with electrical stimulation. Patient needs to be awake to report that they're feeling this in the correct place, and then we use heat to destroy that part of the nerve or partially destroy it. And it's indiscriminate as to the different fiber types that are affected by this pressure works on a physiologic basis. This is again a needle through the foramen o Valley. This is a balloon that's been inflated with a dye so that you can see it when you're in the right place and have the correct shape, it looks like Edward monks the screen, which is very appropriate, I thought. And this works physiologically, this complex diagram here, but basically the pressure has a greater effect on the myelinated than on the unmyelinated fiber. So by damaging the myelinated fibers, you're reducing the source of the aberrant, aberrant signals that are traveling up the pain fibers. That is an outpatient procedure does not the balloon, does not require the patient to be awake, and they can go home the same day. Okay, both of those are highly effective. We'll get back to efficacy at the end. The third one that I mentioned is radio surgery. This is a non invasive treatment originated using the gamma knife, but cyber knife, or linear accelerator, these all work, and they basically cause inflammation in the root of the nerve. They all take weeks, two months to see the full effect. Presumably, there is some change that accompanies this inflammation, which, as it heals over time, is kind of like putting a patch on that short circuit in the nerve. And you see some of our results that we've had here, which are similar to results using radiosurgery and other centers. Finally, there's neuromodulation. This is the idea that you could use electrical stimulation to block the pain in the nerve, and this is the area that I think is most attractive in some ways, because it's less invasive than a craniotomy and less destructive than a rhizotomy. And it is not a new idea, as you see here. The idea is about 2000 years old. I have a little video of this but, but I don't need to play that just for time. I'll just move on here. But this, this is a Pacific Electric ray that that I shot a little video of off the coast of Catalina a few years back. You probably wouldn't want to go around with this on your face, but it's been well known for a long time that that electrical shots and stimulation can block pain. Now it's not again that this is a new idea. So here, here's a summary from 2007 of attempts to use electrical stimulation to modulate pain using the leads at the peripheral branches, at the ganglion or at the root. None of this has reached general use. There are people who use multiple stimulators of peripheral branches. It's a lot of hardware. It has limited efficacy, and so is not commonly used. There's even at one time, as shown in this paper from 1995 from Ron Young. By the way, if you notice how many of these papers written by single authors, you know, it's amazing. You never these days author lists are longer than the abstracts. It's quite interesting to see the number of single author papers that used to exist. But in 1995 this was a system developed by Medtronic called Quinta trigeminal. The idea was to put this lead into the root through the foramen ovale, so as to go through the foramen ovale into the root of the nerve. To use electrical stimulation, it was about 50% effective. It helped about half of the patients to relieve about half of their pain, and in return for that, they had a permanent wire implanted in a pacemaker. The technology was fairly primitive at that time, a single electrode, so it had limited programmability. Well, these days we have all kinds of newer devices that we can put in. This is an epidural cortical stimulator. These are deep brain stimulators. This is something called stim wave. It's a device that uses induction to pick up its power from an external source. So there's lots of this. None of this has been applied to facial pain, and in particular, we've concentrated today, I'm talking about trigeminal neuralgia. But neuropathic pain is also something that we see commonly, for which none of the things that I've shown you for trigeminal knowledge work particularly well. And one would expect that something that can cause that can do stimulation the nerve root would work better. And in fact, you know, our modern DBS technology was developed based on this idea. In other words, we would, in the old days, when we did deep brain simulation for Parkinson's or tremor, we would stimulate through the electrodes, confirm that we had a good effect, and then burn a hole. There. We've moved on from that to not burning holes anymore. Now we have permanently implantable stimulators, but in the case of facial pain, we're still burning holes. And it would be very interesting to be able to apply this modern technology to this. And I'll just tell you that I've been a bit frustrated that none of the companies produce these things are interested in touching this area for reasons that are not entirely clear, but I think this is an active area for development and future research. So finally, outcomes, how well does this work? The things that I've showed you, the corrective and the ablative, all are fairly effective. For MVD, there's 70 to 80% long term complete pain relief. That one out of three patients will have recurrence, generally after many years. Why that is is not entirely clear. Things shift around. New vessels come to compress the nerve. Doesn't seem to be that. TEF. On ball, moving out of the way, but you know, again, this is about the best you can get, and this is considered the gold standard. It's non destructive, and it has a fairly good efficacy for a long term rhizotomy is very effective at short term relief, but it comes at the cost of numbness, and it comes at the cost of the fact that peripheral nerves heal, so that the pain tends to come back after a few years. Now, you can repeat this any number of times you want, but the sensory loss increases with each repetition. And finally, you can end up with something that akin to phantom limb pain called anesthesia Dolorosa, where people have both numbness and pain, so you use this sparingly and as needed. Finally, the radio surgery also works slightly less well than rhizotomy. It's a great choice for people who don't want invasive procedures done.

Speaker 3  45:56  
And it also, like other forms of risottomy tends to occur. In this case, you're limited to two treatments because of the amount of radiation that you're allowed for a lifetime. And the final thing to note is that starting with one of these does not commit you to that as your only treatment. For example, if you were to use radiosurgery and later, the patient decides to come back for an MVD, it does not appear to affect the efficacy of the MVD, so it's good thing for patients to know. And finally, I'm going to come back to this point that I made at the beginning. The pain is not the fifth vital sign. It's a complex phenomenon. It has no susceptive aspects. It has affective aspects. In fact, deep brain simulation for pain has been shown to work best on the affective aspects. And for this reason, all of the surgery needs to be put into the context of the whole patient. These folks are at increased risk of depression, anxiety, sleep disorders, and if you can't treat these, you're not giving effective treatment to the patient. So for that reason, you know, we prefer to treat this as a team approach, of which surgery is one component. I've given you sort of a quick introduction to how we apply surgery, mainly to try Gemma Morales and facial pain. I think it's a good option for patients who are carefully selected. Again, the goal is control of pain and and again, very important to consider the context of the pain is occurring in and manage expectations with that. I'm going to wrap up for now and leave some time for questions. Thank you. I see there's some up here

Speaker 1  47:30  
that and Steve, do you want to comment as well?

Unknown Speaker  47:34  
People have asked

Speaker 2  47:35  
that was great. Thanks, Dr Schweitzer, we have some really good questions, so many. Dr Schweitzer can see them in the Q, a, and just wanted to in the chat, in the chat as well.

Unknown Speaker  47:49  
See those. Maybe take a look at those. That would be great.

Speaker 3  47:51  
Yep. So the first question I see here is an MSD, myelination level, CNS, or both central and peripheral. It seems the answer to that is, it seems that it's demyelination right at that entry zone that causes this. Now presumably there are parts farther downstream, so if you have demyelination in the pain nucle And the thalamus, or even the cortex, in theory, that can cause it. But as I showed you in that one slide, most commonly it's demyelination right at that entry zone where there's this, there's something special about the transition area between Schwann cells and oligodendrome. It seems to make it more sensitive to this. So in general, when patients present with tn type symptoms, it's either right there or immediately inside in this in the central tract of the of the trigeminal nerve. So in that close area, the second question is asking about in patients with type one or two trigeminal neuralgia, can blame an event such as dental treatment for the start of their symptoms? Legally, there seems concept breaking the glass and patient develops Tn is a glass ready to be broken, the collision performance procedure that triggers tn can be held liable for the result. Well, you know, I'm not a legal scholar, and this is a general part of human psychology that Ron you may be able to comment, but you know, we have people who have benign tumors of the spinal cord who will say that they're absolutely convinced that this happened because they fell playing baseball. I mean, it's a natural thing for people to want to ascribe a problem to a particular thing that happened to them. And there just isn't any support for this. Nor is there any way for a dentist to predict that something he does is going to set off something like this. So, you know, again, I'm trying to avoid being a expert witness for things like this, but I don't think that that someone trying to sue a dentist for causing trigeminal neuralgia would get very far with it. If you have someone experienced with trigeminal neuralgia can say that's what it is. I mean, I'm speculating that in some people. Of this seems to be a trigger that can set it off. But again, you know, some of this is, is kind of unproven impression from from seeing lots of patients like this, I wouldn't be terribly worried about this. The next question, any estimate on how much the brain moves inside the skull? Very interesting question, you know, again, it's hard to measure that without putting a hole in. Once you put a hole in, air gets in. Things definitely do move, and I have mapped that it can beat by a couple of millimeters. Dr Janetta, who I introduced before, would teach you that if you as a surgeon, go in there and don't find a blood vessel pressing on the nerve, it's because you haven't looked hard enough. And he was quite serious about that. And he was also serious about the fact that when you go in there at surgery, the patient's lying flat, you're draining spinal fluid, that the position of the patient affects this, not just gravity, but you know, we're looking we're used to look at MRI scans as though we're looking at the patient's face, but in reality, that's the way we display the MRI scan. Is not the way the position the patient is positioned during the scan. Furthermore, when you move your head around, these structures are moving. The spinal cord is twisting and moving as your head turns on the spinal column, the vessels there, which are attached down below to the first cervical vertebrae are moving to some extent. So these anatomic relationships change, not just with gravity, but with movement. You know exactly how much would be difficult to measure, but based on the movement of spinal fluid down into the fecal sac when people stand up, I would guess that it probably is, is a few millimeters on the order of two to three millimeters. Finally, when a patient presents a bilateral tn symptoms, do we suspect ms or different, different diagnosis, bilateral ms or bilateral trigeminal neuralgia? Immediately raises suspicion that this is not trigeminal neuralgia, and if you remember back to some of those early slides on differential bilateral pain was one of the things that sent you down another path of that decision tree. So it's possible, it's actually very common for us to see people with trigeminal neuralgia who have vascular compression on their MRI scan that's on both sides, but only have symptoms on one for reasons that aren't clear. I think you always have to rule out Ms, and I have seen people who clearly have both things, who have vascular compression and MS, where it is the vascular compression that's the cause of trigeminal neuralgia. When you have two fairly common situations, you can get that. So I think that bilateral pain would steer you away from this being tn at all, but I think it's necessary to rule these things out. And again, getting an MRI scan is worth, you know, a room full of neurologists, and I mentioned that it's not as successful for type two. That's true for type two, i The number one thing is managing patient expectations. So if someone comes in and their pain is predominantly this constant background pain, I will immediately tell them that that is less likely to respond, not zero, but that it's less likely to respond than the classic symptoms that being said, I would still offer any of these three. There are not clear data that show that one is better than or that one of these three approaches, the corrective, ablative or modulator, that that that one of them is better than the other, so that any of the surgical approaches work more or less well for that type when I expect the outcome to be not as good, though, I prefer not to jump right to the most invasive treatment. In other words, you have to balance risk and benefit. If you expect your benefit to be less, you want your risk to be less also. So in general, for people like this, I'll have a discussion about it, and I would steer more towards a rhizotomy as a good balance between efficacy and risk. Let's see. And there's a question with post MVD recurrence, would you go back in and do MVD again? Well, it's always a consideration. I've done many repeat mvds. You know, it's always easy to criticize what other people do. I've often gone in and found that things have shifted around, that there's a vessel there that wasn't found. The first time I had one patient ran back in the the Teflon fluff was not there at all. It had presumably fallen out and gone someplace. So MVD is definitely consideration again, if Dr Janetta were here that he would tell you that you missed something. Go back and do it again. So absolutely, but these things work in any order that you. Do them. And so many patients are reluctant to have another MVD. And those patients I would offer either of the others, either a radio surgery procedure or a rhizotomy.

Speaker 2  55:16  
We have other questions. One other question that came in from the chat that I'll read, Is there a correlation between time from onset of trigeminal neuralgia to surgical intervention and outcome? That's an excellent question. The answer really seems to be no. You know, I've had people with pain for many, many years that either went undiagnosed or they were reluctant to have it treated and and the answer is no. Why? That is may relate to, you know, our poor understanding of the etiology here, as I mentioned, when you do an MVD, if this is really caused by demyelination, you would not expect it to immediately be myelinated again. And so when people get pain relief, it's from something else. It's either from handling the nerve and blocking the pain impulses coming through, which is not going to depend on how long it's been going on, or it is, as some people theorize, that the nerve or the vessel pulsating on that bare, unmyelinated nerve, is actually setting off action potentials, so there's not a clear correlation with duration of symptoms prior to the surgery. What does get damaged is the patient's psychosocial situation, and so people have been living with pain for years and years develop compensatory mechanisms in their lives that may be difficult to reverse. I think there is such a thing is too soon. I think that someone comes in with trigeminal neuralgia that started six weeks ago and has not had a fair trial of medication, that's too early go to surgery, but there's no upper limit on that, and I don't counsel patients who've had this for 10 years that they should not have surgery or that it's going to make a difference in their outcome. I

Unknown Speaker  57:05  
I guess we have only one minute for last comment or questions.

Unknown Speaker  57:11  
Any other thoughts? Steve, no, I

Speaker 2  57:15  
think that was great, and questions were very, very appropriate and timely, and thank you for the for the answers.

Speaker 3  57:23  
Thank you very much for allowing me to talk today. This was a lot of fun. I enjoyed it. Thank you.

Unknown Speaker  57:29  
Thank you very much. Dr, it's always pleasure to have you. We are glad that we had you couple of times today during this session, not today, and then hopefully looking forward to have you in the future as well. Thank you everybody for your time. Please be safe out there. We are just on time see you next week. Please send us your feedback or any comments that you have to our continuing education office or directed to me. Thank you and be safe. Have a nice day and enjoy the rest of the week. Thank you. Thank you. Thank

Unknown Speaker  58:01  
you very much. Bye.

Transcribed by https://otter.ai
