Speaker 1  0:04  
Welcome everybody. We have an esteemed speaker today, as always. A little bit of housekeeping information. It's about four minutes to our speakers coming on at right, at the start time with a little bit of delay there due to a snow issue in the Midwest someplace, but we'll ideally start right on time. Just for those interested, let me scroll through so you get it now. We have no conflicts. There's nothing hidden that's causing us to speak. So that's important to underscore the I will review the learning objectives for our steam speaker here, as well as the disclosures. And there's no substantive disclosures in terms of our particular speaker. I there was an issue with people getting the SMS code for attendance, I'm going to for some reason, people have asked me actually to read it aloud, because they there are some visual issues for a couple of folks. So the the code is the capital L, A, C, G E M, and you text that to 857-214-2277, that's capital L, A, C, G E M. Text it to 857-214-2277, it'll also be in a chat reminder. Put your questions in the question section and administrative information in the chat right at eight, we start a couple of minutes early. Remember that Dr Guerra and her colleague me get this here, Julie criola is putting together a meeting for people who have a particular personal interest in pain, either relative with pain, they work personally in the area, or have experience with pain, so we'll be having a meeting in late March regarding that. I think all are here today. Some folks are regular folks are not on the panel today, as usual, we wish Dr Keith some luck and fun. He's currently traveling in Antarctica, and we have some other folks that are on vacation as well.

Unknown Speaker  2:38  
Okay, I

Unknown Speaker  2:43  
let me go back here.

Speaker 1  2:52  
Matt, my clock says about one minute, 759, does that sound about right?

Speaker 2  2:59  
Yep, I apologize. Dr Coolidge, I guess we have to make sure the code is working. It seems that we have a problem with the code.

Unknown Speaker  3:07  
The code that I sent another

Unknown Speaker  3:09  
message in the chat for everybody to view,

Unknown Speaker  3:14  
the code that I read you is an issue for someone,

Speaker 1  3:19  
L, A, C, G, E, M, texted to a, 572-214-2277,

Speaker 3  3:27  
who, who. Sorry, that code is incorrect. Please try again. Yeah,

Unknown Speaker  3:32  
we don't have the right code.

Speaker 1  3:35  
Okay, Matt, do you want to reach out to Donnell? Is this, do I have the right to, I have the right to

Unknown Speaker  3:45  
SMS code you?

Unknown Speaker  3:47  
I'll get in touch with Carlina, because I have that same thing

Speaker 1  3:50  
before it's over. Okay, rather, okay, we're working on the code. I'm sorry, there's a barrier with that. We'll, we'll make everyone whole here and fix it.

Unknown Speaker  4:03  
Usually, it's seamless.

Unknown Speaker  4:05  
Okay? It's eight.

Speaker 1  4:08  
Any news from our log on? Dr Chapman,

Unknown Speaker  4:14  
no, I'll check one more time. I expect to be imminently.

Speaker 1  4:19  
My apologies, our esteemed speaker, there was some snow bank issue, and he's coming in from the Midwest right now, so we've been on the phone with him. Like to say we have his slides here to put out post, but he will

Unknown Speaker  4:39  
be posting those?

Unknown Speaker  4:43  
Oh, our attendees figured out our typo.

Speaker 1  4:48  
Okay, so it's was an attendee putting it in and not us. No,

Speaker 3  4:52  
our attendees were correct and we were wrong in the email, it says, L, A, G, C, E, M, I.

Unknown Speaker  5:00  
And that's the correct code.

Speaker 1  5:03  
Okay, so this is incorrect. It's not L A C, G, E M, yes. What? What is it? L A G C E M, L A G C E M, okay, so ignore this code. Look at the one in the chat. Apparently you got the wrong code transposed here. So I'm going to minimize this. Hopefully we'll have those slides on Do you have a phone? Are you in phone communication with our friend Michael? I

Unknown Speaker  5:31  
spoken just a few minutes ago. I just texted him. I

Unknown Speaker  5:44  
He was just moments away from his clinic. Well, yeah,

Speaker 1  5:56  
okay, welcome everyone. We have a number of folks coming in. Our speaker has some snow issues, and unfortunately, we do not have a slide updated slides here, so let's maybe

Speaker 1  6:22  
you announcements. Actually, there are some folks I wanted to thank as well. There's a number of individuals that have been very gracious in terms of support. We have a section since we're funded by donations, I just like to do a significant shout outs for a very gracious person who's helped really make this all happen through her contributions, Donna Donna Sultan, so she's, yet again, substantially helped us with support others have as well, but in terms of their heroic efforts, Donna has really been great. So thank you, Donna, for your help

Unknown Speaker  7:10  
with our nonprofit funding.

Speaker 1  7:18  
So I just put him on by phone so he could talk Michael. Okay,

Unknown Speaker  7:29  
he's on Okay, here we go.

Unknown Speaker  7:33  
Start to well. He's

Speaker 1  7:37  
well, he's tuning up. Start his introduction. If you could,

Unknown Speaker  7:40  
I'll be happy to do so.

Unknown Speaker  7:46  
So thank you everyone, and thank you for bearing with us. We're just running a couple minutes late, and we're in for a treat today. Our speaker is Dr wairay arju, and he's an interventional pain physician at the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center Williamsport campus. But he's more than an interventional pain physician. He had he's no stranger to Boston, as he did his after doing his medical training in Mayo, medical school in Rochester, Minnesota, he completed a general surgery internship at the Brigham and then an anesthesiology residency at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, and then he did his chronic pain fellowship with Dr Coolidge at Mass General Harvard Medical School. Dr ahuru is an expert in the diagnosis and treatment of patients with chronic pain conditions, as well as a prolific researcher, and I'm talking very prolific. He also has a Master's Degree in Public Health from Harvard University School of Public Health, and his master's focused on quantitative methods, particularly research study designs and statistical analyzes. He's published over 150 peer reviewed articles, which is shocking given his very young age, as well as multiple book chapters in the field of anesthesiology and chronic pain management. He's received numerous awards, including the outstanding resident Teaching Award at Harvard, Harvard Medical School. And he publishes routinely in journals including Jama surgery, anesthesia and analgesia, regional anesthesia and pain medicine, the spine journal pain medicine, pain physician, neuromodulation, and the Journal of pain research. For the past year, he's been the cosection head editor of the regenerative medicine section of the Journal of pain research, and I feel blessed to have him working with me. So without further ado, I'd

Unknown Speaker  9:59  
like. Okay, is he unmuted?

Unknown Speaker  10:03  
I just send a message.

Speaker 3  10:04  
He has capacity to share. Where

Unknown Speaker  10:08  
is get him on a

Unknown Speaker  10:12  
he seemed to have logged on, but I don't see him.

Unknown Speaker  10:14  
I can hear you guys. Can you hear me?

Speaker 1  10:16  
We can hear you. And where are your we need you to

Unknown Speaker  10:20  
so my slides are being shared right now.

Unknown Speaker  10:23  
We do not see your slides.

Unknown Speaker  10:26  
Let's see,

Unknown Speaker  10:30  
we don't see your picture. It's camera on, all right,

Unknown Speaker  10:34  
let's put the camera on. Camera is on now. Hey guys,

Unknown Speaker  10:41  
good, good to see you again. Okay, you guys,

Unknown Speaker  10:43  
sorry for the delay. Let's

Unknown Speaker  10:47  
see so screen share is turned on.

Unknown Speaker  10:52  
Make sure,

Unknown Speaker  10:57  
if you need to send us the slides, we could do that

Unknown Speaker  11:02  
now it's pretty much.

Unknown Speaker  11:07  
Let's see here.

Unknown Speaker  11:15  
Yeah, it's currently being shared, but I'll check one more time just to make sure, and I'm going to share one more time. Excellent,

Unknown Speaker  11:27  
great. So

Unknown Speaker  11:28  
Joe, now I think

Unknown Speaker  11:33  
I'm going to open this up.

Unknown Speaker  11:38  
Sorry guys, I

Unknown Speaker  11:41  
we had a snow storm at Pennsylvania, and the roads are pretty bad, so, so I will get this going.

Unknown Speaker  11:53  
Ah, you're previewing the slides already.

Unknown Speaker  11:58  
There you go. Perfect. Okay,

Unknown Speaker  12:02  
can you see the slides?

Unknown Speaker  12:04  
It's all yours. We generally do

Speaker 1  12:07  
45 minutes or so, and then we'll have a lot of discussion. We have, we'll have several 100 on. Thanks again. So much for doing this.

Unknown Speaker  12:15  
No, absolutely. Doc Chapman, Dr Coolidge, everybody else who's currently on this call, thanks for the opportunity to really talk about what is extremely important and fundamental in our space, and it's the concept of hared decision making in what we do in chronic pain and management, but really going into the ethical and public health implications thsat we face pretty much every day, you can argue. And my hope is that, you know, I'll be able to really define what what shared decision making in pain management actually means, going to some of the bioethical principles of shared decision making in a space, and then hopefully analyze the ethical and public health implications of of shared decision making in a chronic pain space. Now the agenda is going to be as it's going to be pretty straightforward. I'll go through the introduction, go through the pain management aspect, the bioethical principles, public health and really my punchline that I usually call when in doubt. So I think there's a fundamental understanding of how history has panned out when it comes to medical decision making. And what's very interesting is, if you look back to the 1900s all the way down to early 1990s you can see that there's there was a huge gap in really understanding the psychology of that patient physician relationship. But what is obvious is that the trend is migrating towards and empowering patients to ensure that they understand why they, why they they receive the care that they did, that they do. Now, having said that is what exactly are we referring to shared as shared decision making. This idea is that the patient and the physician develops shared goals. They develop informed decision and there is patient engagement where the patient is actively involved in the decision making process about their health and the care that they receive. Now this is important, and the reason why this is important is because when shared decision making is implemented, studies have shown that it promotes patient autonomy, satisfaction and the value and preferences of the patients are recognized early to. In the journey of their care. Not shocking. You can see that there are numerous studies, numerous studies that actually talk about the role of shared decision making as it pertains to patient satisfaction, treatment adherence, reducing inequalities, cost reduction and even improving or minimizing what what has been referred to as the decision conflict process that most of us have probably encountered during our clinic visit. So now, the real summary that I you know, one of the summary that I put out here is just so as an audience, you can extrapolate some of the major findings from from the literature. Is the major benefits of shared decision making is there is improved patient and provider satisfaction, which is pretty straightforward, if applied correctly, there is better enhancements to treatment adherence, healthcare outcomes, such as reduction of pain scores, reduction of blood pressure, reduction especially in The primary care space, outcomes that pertains to chronic diseases, it's been documented to see significant improvement in those in those outcomes. Not surprisingly, when there is shared participation, there is reduction in decisional conflict and and multiple studies have reported better efficiency in running that clinical practice increased cost savings, and, like I mentioned previously, reduction of health inequalities, which we're going to get into in the public health aspect. So now we're going to migrate from this broad framework of shared decision making to looking at the evidence, the definition of the pain space, some of the potential decision considerations we should think about as we really go through this framework of shared decision making in a pain space. So not surprisingly, there are multiple studies that have been put out there regarding shared decision making in the pain space. I put this as a reference for for the audience to go back to, should you, if you want to go through some of the high yield studies, clinical trials, as well as review articles out there? But one of the ones that I that I thought was very pertinent to what we do in the chronic pain space goes back to Lisa's article and Lee and Dr Key's article about really how to think about the concept of that patient provider interaction as it relates to shared decision making. Now in the pain space, it's not any different. It's not any different from what you see in the non pain space. When you think about shared decision making, our patient population could be you could classify as pretty complicated because of the multiple etiology that can explain the pain symptoms that they have from the bio psychosocial to the physiologic changes, mechanical changes, physiological changes. But it's the same concept, right? Regardless of the etiology of the chronic pain state. It's the idea that in the in a pain space, shared decision making is sharing information between provider and patients, expressing candid opinions that is geared towards the patient's clinical outcome, and finally, and more importantly, building a consensus towards a treatment decision that will enhance the patient's outcome during your visit. Now I'm going to go through a few process that that could hopefully create a concept of shared decision making and how it can be applied even further in the pain space. The study I just present that I just displayed by Charles really does a good job going through what this encounter looks like. And from this study, which is very cited in the shared decision making space, it comes down to understanding what this definition of shared means. And like I mentioned, participants include the physician and the patient. The information sharing has to be bi directional. It's not just the physician empowering the patient about their diagnosis. It has to be the physician also receiving from the patient what the true. Understand about the diagnosis, so that bi directionality is very important, and the third component is a concept of consensus, that there is an agreement and and the agreement is more because there is understanding of preferred treatment by the patient, and also an understanding of what the conveyed diagnosis is by the physician, and obviously the final component of this is agreeing to a treatment plan that is going going to be executed.

Unknown Speaker  20:31  
Now the question now is,

Unknown Speaker  20:34  
when is this appropriate? When is shared decision making appropriate? I think this is a great slide, a great study, because what it helps us do is, you know, really think about, at what level should we be thinking about the shared decision making, what setting? And what was great about this study was they looked at multiple areas where shared decision making processes have been implemented and and what it came down to was the characteristics of the setting where you can most likely see that a very impactful component of shared decision making is settings where there is a short time frame to make a decision, a high impact decision, like going for a surgical intervention that could be life saving, or that could be, that could be, that could result to terminal outcomes if not performed, and and a Decision characteristic setting where there is this preference sensitivity components to the conversation. And it's also found that when there is uncertainty of outcomes in a setting where the clinical practice exists, it tends to yield a very impactful indication for utilizing shared decision making. Now, if you think about the chronic pain space, whether you are a surgeon or a psychologist or a psychiatrist or an interventional pain physician or a dentist who manages pain from multiple etiology, what you recognize is in a practice that is busy, or in a practice where you're encountering so much patient, these actually apply, and I do think because of some of this characteristic, it's very easy to argue the need for shared decision making in our pain space. Now what I wanted to highlight about this slide is the study actually goes through multiple specialties, and it's the idea that the the areas or the setting where you encounter a preference sensitive dialog, A preference sensitive conversation, it is not unusual to to start considering the impact of shared decision making in that encounter, and right here, you can tell the darkest you know, the darkest color just implies that the shared decision making was used more frequently and not surprising. You can see that in oncology and a lot of other settings, such as primary care and mental health. So just that data to present out there. Now, the one thing that I thought was going to be very impactful to in trying to understand this framework is, you know, really understanding what what the evidence is. Now the conceptual framework for shared decision making, you know, this really takes me back to, you know, my public health background is the idea of understanding relationships, right? So when you think about a study and you're trying to figure out the relationship between the exposures and outcomes, you know, you think about direct acyclic graphs. I mean, these are not directed cyclic graphs. But the idea is that a very interesting conceptual framework by crepes, postulates that communication can be can impact patient outcomes and reduce symptoms, improve quality of life, improve physiological measures if you actually create direct engagement between parties and and that's almost like a no brainer, but it's an important framework to think about, because when you when you think about that busy pain practice, it's very hard to implement, because having This direct, impactful conversation without a structural framework could be, could be very tricky. Now, what gets very exciting, though, is the indirect pathway, and it's the idea that if you're actually able to create this direct path, you can indirectly start impacting the patient's secondary outcomes, or or or outcomes that you don't foresee could have been impacted. Acted like the behavioral aspect, the effective cognitive component, and that, by itself, again, creates this framework for understanding how shared decision making can be implemented in our individual practice. Now, I like this saying by a tool, Dr Gawande, and it's the idea that patients come to us, you know, not just because they need some kind of a cure, you know, they want to find meaning and understanding. What this means the most to patients is really the key to to helping them travel through this journey and and I really love this statement, because it truly creates a ground for for taking a step back every time we encounter, especially that challenging case in in our practice. Now, having said that, I'm going to dive into some of the bioethical component of of this conversation, and my hope is to go through some of the ethical consideration as it pertains to shared decision making, and also, again, go back to what a potential conceptual framework could be utilized as we think about the bioethical aspects with shared decision making in our chronic pain population. So for the purpose of this talk, and you know that the ethical part, you could dive in as deep as you can and and there's so many aspects of what we do that can be that have multiple ethical consideration. But for the purpose of this talk, I'm going to focus on these four pillars, the concept of autonomy that we're all aware of, which is respecting the patient's choice and values and decision making. Beneficence, which is promoting well being by managing the pain effectively. Non maleficence, which is avoiding interventions that may cause harm or the do no harm, phrases we were all aware of, and really justice as it comes down to ensuring equitable access to pain management and minimizing inequality. You know, these are the four pillars of the ethical consideration that I will hopefully dive into the next few for the next few slides, and then go step out so we can create a conceptual framework to further understand this better. So before going into some of those bioethical concepts, what is the real challenge here? So the real challenge, and some of you may agree, and I'm sure there's more to this, but the real challenge in a chronic pain space is like any other space, whether it's healthcare or non healthcare, patient satisfaction, or what you can refer to as customer satisfaction in a pain space, patient satisfaction, unfortunately, 79% of patients with chronic pain are dissatisfied with your care, and it's for multiple reasons. We can go into those reasons, but primarily, a lot of these dissatisfaction comes down to miscommunication or some kind of lack of understanding between parties involved, whether it's a physician and a patient, whether it's payers and a patient, whether it's even between patients and family member, there is a huge component of lack of clarity communication and dissatisfaction, and that seems to be a very, very impactful when it comes to dealing with some of the negative outcomes in our space. The other components to what creates a challenge for us on our daily basis, as a concept of using medications that could significantly be either psychoactive, addictive or again, you know, these are neuromodulatory or or or physiologically modulating drugs that can impact not just the pain state, but but other outcomes that that could be that is extremely important. And you know, we've seen this in the context of the opioid crisis that was, you know, observed in the US and now across multiple parts of the world, but, but again, this creates a challenge for us in this space. And the same thing applies to healthcare by itself. You know how sustainable it is, because you and I already know we, we all face the some of the rigors of approval for patients to even get access to the care that they deserve or or clinically justified. And again, creates another challenge for us, because here now we're looking at we're looking at that, the concept that that that when we go into our practice, these are ethical things that we need to really be very mindful of now, Now, having said that, though our ethical obligation remains the same, right so the. Central value of medicine is to ameliorate suffering in patients and chronic pain patients, cancer and non cancer pain are extremely, extremely vulnerable patients, and it's extremely important that the principles of non maleficence, beneficence, justice and and patient autonomy, respect for patient autonomy, be considered in this setting. So So now let's go through a few concepts. 

Unknown Speaker  30:28  
I really want to highlight this, this book, and I say this because there was in a lot of depth in content written by our own, Dr shatman, and a lot of the framework and understanding we're very, very, very detailed in in this, in this literature, in this book, and highly recommend it. So, having said that, let's talk about patient autonomy. You know, very simple understanding. Sorry, did I was there a question? Okay, so patient autonomy. Now, the concept of patient autonomy is respecting the independent wishes of the patient. Sounds straightforward. Well, not necessarily, right, because what, what the what the patient desires, may not always correlate with what the clinical outcome could be. Could could be resulted to, but it all but, but in the end, the definition is very clear. The patient has the right to refuse or accept treatment, and that's what creates the autonomy. Now, what is a challenge in our pain space, right? If you think about the patient autonomy in our space, you can you can easily tie that to patients or gradually losing control of their care, because just the disease states itself creates such an experience where, you know, there is a negative sequela that comes from just being in chronic pain state, the emotional, behavioral, social, recreational, you know, you name it, financial and also legal. Ramification, you know, it gradually chips away the patient's ability to make decision, and, and, and a lot of you who are seeing patients at multiple spaces, whether it's on the psychological part or treating headaches or back pain, neck pain, or performing surgical procedures. You can tell that a lot of these patients who are in this quantification state or or chronicity, if you want to call it, are losing autonomy every day. And it's and it's important to recognize this, because it creates a layer of challenge in this bioethical framework and not to go into the patient healthcare coverage. Now that raises a question, though, what we think is this really, is this autonomy, or are we? Are we looking into non maleficence, versus maleficence? You know, you could, you could argue multiple components of healthcare coverage, and we're going to dive into it a little bit. So non maleficence, again, the concept of do no harm, it's challenging, right? Because there is this. The concept of do no harm as a clinician is very simple. You understand the application of the therapies you're recommending to the patients, and you're minimizing every possible way of of impacting this patient negatively. However, the patient may not have access to this therapy. And the question of non maleficence, it really goes down to some of the ethical dilemma we see with payers, and I would say with healthcare administrators, right? So a patient needs a therapy, the therapy is not covered because, based on the internal laws, the internal ethos or regulatory policies created by the payers the patient may not necessarily have access to the therapy. Now, does that mean that this is maleficence? Well, the payers may not see it that way, because they they they may create a policy that they think is ethical and moral to their cooperation, and based on that policy, patients could be denied care, you know, but as a clinician, we see the opposite, right? Because we see the clinical indication, we see that there is strong evidence, there is there is clinical trials and studies that have shown that this therapy works, and from our perspective, clearly when that's when it's so clear that the evidence could support good outcome, you can, you can strongly argue that that it's at least maleficence, because maleficence suggests that you know it's wrong doing right you're not. You may not physically harm someone directly, but. It's wrong doing and over time that can, that can potentially result to harm. So again, frameworks, ethical frameworks to think about when you when we think about maleficence in our space. Now, beneficence is pretty straightforward, and it's the idea that you know, you promote well being by controlling the pain effectively and and this is the primary goal of of of that we the primary goal of chronic pain professionals as well as healthcare providers in this space. But again, we run into the same challenges, and you can when you run into a profit model enterprise where emphasis is placed on cost reduction and emphasis is placed on profitability, you really run the risk of providing adequate resources to promote patients well being, and we see similar setting in where you see similar outcomes, where beneficence is compromised because economic models are placed over therapeutic models. So again, you can kind of see the intertwined with beneficence and non maleficence. But it's the same idea that when you reduce the access to resources that patients could have utilized, you can really impact their well being. Now justice again, is that the other component I was going to really talk about, and again, it's the idea that you're ensuring equitable access to patients who are in chronic pain. You know, there's several studies that have been put out there reporting under treatment of vulnerable population, minority population, underserved population. Physicians recognize this as a concern. Historically, the amount of awareness was not as not as high, compared to moving to more recent studies, and that I consider as progress. But again, it's important to understand what can be done or or at least recognize why some of these things are present in our practice. Now, when you look at inequalities in chronic pain management, it is not surprising to see that the studies studies have reported low income education like, you know, having less education certain ethnic or minority group and race as well as gender, are significantly impacted. There's several studies reporting African Americans having having inequalities in outcome, as well as even female patients having inequalities and outcomes and when it comes to the chronic pain states, and not to forget the third party payers, who unfortunately can make decisions internally that can impact who can eventually have access to care, thereby compounding or or increasing the inequalities that we see so So, having said that, you know, I think one of the things that I want to really shift into is the framework. I'm just going to adjust my screen a little bit here in the framework. 

Unknown Speaker  39:24  
Now, what are the ethical framework that we should consider, consider when we think about shared decision making in our space. You've, you know, we've all seen what the pillars of bioethics in a pain space could look like. Now, what are the frameworks that we can consider to truly, truly start changing the dialog and and I truly like this article written by dinof at the British Journal of anesthesia, of anesthesia. And it's the idea of taking advantage of understanding Chaldeans framework and codigens framework is really straightforward, and it says that the purpose of of dialog, if it's centered around human flourishing, medical treatment or diagnosis, goals of care, values and benefits, and really understanding the concepts of health that one can actually aspire or, more importantly, achieve a better healthcare outcome in in a pain space and and there, you know, there's several ways to understand this. For from a medical test component, it comes down to how you interact with the patient regarding their imaging. From a human flourishing component, it goes back to how you interact with the patient, about their well being. Goals of care. It goes back to how you interact with the patient regarding what does the patient want? What what is this autonomous to them? Or am I? Am I Am I pushing this decision on the patient values and belief? Very similar concepts of health. Again, very similar. Are you communicating with the patient, whether it's through visual aids, whether it's through AI, whether it's through a structural a mental structure that ensures that the patient is a part of the care. Are you using this five components to achieve that? And and collagen framework suggests that if you can incorporate some of this five framework into your daily practice, you can most likely, or you can at least strive to achieve shared decision making process in the pains in your chronic pain space. So the other component of this, which I thought was very interesting, little bit more complicated, and I put this as a reference, so what? So we can all go back to it if you're interested, to try to try to tease out the ethical decision making process. And this was published by Anna as well as Dr shatman, a journal of pain research, looking at what the conceptual framework should be. I do think what is important to mention is you have to be able to understand what the role is as a healthcare provider and really understand the role of the patient. And the reason why that's critical is because they're interchangeable. Okay? It's almost like running statistics, right? If you understand the association between variables, you're going to be able to predict what the outcomes are. Now it's the understanding of the variable is so important. And what I like about about this presentation, about this concept, is the moral is you, one has to understand the role that they play as a healthcare provider, but more importantly, understand the role of the patient and and the happy medium is when relationship between both roles are established and communication is very clear, you can achieve a Much better, ethical conversation that can result to hopefully better healthcare outcome. So now we're going to go to the public health component of this conversation. And again, my goal would be to really highlight some of the challenges the framework, again, that we can work with, some of the processes that comes with shared decision making and and really understanding what some of the potential barriers could be with shared decision making. So again, a few papers to highlight the public health aspects of what we do in a chronic pain space. I do like the study. I like to review. I do like the review article written by Dr Steve Cohen recently on Lance, said really highlighting what the burden is for the burden of chronic pain, when the society itself, and it goes back to understanding the pathophysiology, the biopsychosocial model, really understanding how the etiology itself is not just a broken femur. You know, it's the it's the it's the social, psychological, a really good article, highly recommended and not not shocking when you talk about public health and pain, it's very difficult to ignore the opioid crisis, as that was one of the biggest public health concern that we had encountered in this space and still continue to encounter, though it's improved significantly and and then I there's another, another good article I recommend is one by males published in British Journal of anesthesia in 2019 really going through what these factors are that that could be associated with the public health related outcomes in the pain space, and I'll dive into that in the next slide and in subsequent slide. Now, the one thing I wanted to just bring up is, you know, the opioid component, because and in a chronic pain space that the opiate pandemic really shook how we thought about caring for patients and and multiple guidelines have been put in place to mitigate some of this public health concern. And the CDC continues to provide, you know, evidence based guidelines to improve communication. And this is important, because with utilizing shared decision making between you and your patient. It could, you can, one can, can. One can attain even better clinical outcome, because you get to discuss limiting initial prescription when necessary, you get to discuss use of alternative methods, such as the injections, the psychological evaluation or treatment, and then, more importantly, discuss the risk and benefits. So again, you're going into the whole concept of addressing some of the major aspect that has resulted to the pandemic, opioid pandemic in the first place. And I thought it was an important slide to communicate. Yeah. Now, when we think about chronic pain and public health, it's a very complex relationship, and I say complex because we very few studies and and I really wasn't convinced with some of the reports in the literature, partly because it's very hard to really study, but we all know it exists. And the public health component of chronic pain is a complex relationship, but it ties back to understanding the key players or variables that that is, whether directly or indirectly, associated with healthcare outcomes and in a pain space, it's not shocking to see that in in in an age group, gender, ethnic group, cultural background, socio economic background, employment status, and how all of those can has actually impacted access to care or or even ability to go back to work. And the other thing that I that I thought was worth mentioning is lifestyle and behavior and clearly the clinical outcomes some patients coming to the clinic with already more severe pain state versus others who have had access with with less severe pain states, thereby even creating a much more complex relationship. Now is that a public health crisis? Is that a public health issue? I do think a lot a lot of research still needs to be done to truly tie that relationship. What is very clear, though, is that there is a relationship between socio economic status and healthcare outcomes. There is very clear relationship between social economic outcomes and as social determinants of health. And clearly, if that relationship can result to an economic burden, one can hypothesize that you can eventually see the association with with public health and chronic pain and again, don't forget the biopsychosocial model as well. So now, having said that, the question now is, we know that there is a relationship between public health and chronic pain. Now, where does shared decision making come into play? I wanted to really go through this article because it the article did a really good job going through how shared decision making could reduce health inequalities, and it cut across all specialties, not necessarily in the pain space. And these authors, what they did was really looked at, they performed a met a systematic review and meta analysis. They utilized shared decision making models. So the study utilized shared decision making models, it was included. And what was very interesting was they looked at the population of the studies, and if the population had at least 50% that were underserved, that the studies were included in this analysis, and what was found, which I'm not going to go into details, is if you look at the forest plot of the study, was that the forest plot was favorable, favorable towards improving healthcare outcomes Among disadvantaged patients if shared decision making process was implemented. So again, these are very encouraging studies to really highlight that there is signals and there are, there's data out there suggesting that we can, we can truly utilize SDM for improving patient outcome. Now, one of the things that I just wanted to highlight in terms of thinking about what this means is, you know, again, going back to shared decision making process, you introduce a decision, the patient understands it, you present the option, you make recommendation, and then it's always important to ensure that the patient understands it. And the final goal is that a consensus is made where the clinician and patient makes a shared decision based on the clinical evidence, the patient's value and patient patient's preference. There are multiple studies that have discussed how this could be accomplished. Visual aids, AI, all have seemed to be impactful in multiple settings.

Unknown Speaker  49:24  
I think it's important to remember that there are barriers to shared decision making, time constraint, knowledge gaps, cultural norms, health literacy, that the list goes on and on. But the reason why this is important is because the impact of each of these barriers vary from one setting to another, but it's important to recognize that they exist. Now I go back to this when in doubt slide, and it's really one of the things that I you know, it's hard to accomplish with our busy lives, but, you know, observe it. If you see it, observe it. Ask questions. Is analyze it and communicate it and and the reason why I always go back to this is when you think about the shared decision making space, it's such a young field. It's a very, very young field, especially in chronic pain management. And I do think that there is a lot of work to be done, and there's a potential significant impact that this could have in our space, and with that, I would like to just thank everyone for listening. Patient centered care is why we do what we do. It's truly an honor presenting this talk, and I'm looking forward to taking questions. Thank you.

Unknown Speaker  50:42  
Thank you very much. Thank you very much for this very thought inspiring talk. We have some questions from the attendees. I want to ask a quick question too to get this rolling. You had spoken about the four bioethical principles, and he talked about justice, equal access. And our rounds was actually started in the dental space. So we have many dentists, some of whom treat chronic pain, some of whom treat only acute pain. But dental medicine has is sort of different than than traditional medicine. Um, in that more is more of the services are paid for out of pocket than is the case in in general medicine, yeah. And to me, it seems that, you know, in looking at the literature, a lot of people are foregoing dental care, and some have even gone as far as to suggest that, because of economics, dentistry is becoming a service for the wealthy. And I wonder if you have any thoughts about that.

Unknown Speaker  52:00  
I mean, I, Dr chadman, you bring a very, very, very important question. And the question here is, you know, does there's a cash pay setting enhance or make us question one aspect of or multiple aspects of our ethical, ethical standards and, and I do think it's, it's a very, very, very, very, it's very, very good questions that can go both ways, right? So, you know, there is there. There are dental practices that I personally worked with where it's, it's there. There are financial plans made available for patients that cannot have access and and, and having that, I think, for me, is, is an ethical model, right? Because the cash pay itself, I personally do not consider as a way of as a way of hindrance to care, but a cash pay that prevents everybody from gaining access could be a hindrance to care. So, so I think that really what you're the what this raises is a question of justice, and are we ensuring that patients have access to care, and are we creating barriers by by primarily focusing on on cash pay settings? I don't think barriers are created if a practice accommodates patients that cannot afford care and ensures that they actually have access to whether it's a payment plan over time, so that the burden is on is not on the patient or unfortunately, just like every other businesses right off a few losses, you know, I think it's a fine line. It's a balance, and, and, and the practices that would do this ethically, ethically will consider all facets. Clearly, you have to be viable economically, but, but, but all facets would have to be considered, ensuring that, ensuring that patients, who are, you know, practices that are utilizing cash pay for the most part, are ensuring that everybody can have access to it, but at a different method of engagement. So, so it's a very, very loaded question, because in the end, you have to continue to run a business, and it's very understandable, but that concept of justice can still be appropriately applied by developing policies.

Unknown Speaker  54:26  
Thank you. That was the difficult question. I'm going to go to Dr cool that you has a question now, and hopefully it will get easier, easier than that tough one I just threw at you.

Speaker 1  54:35  
We there's a number of questions on here. We also have Dr Crandall from Vermont, who's done a lot of work in the social determinants of health space, so he may have some commentary. So I have one question, and maybe there's a controversial sort of edge to it here. So our pain medicine is sort of the Wild West in terms of absence of database evidence, in terms of Lot. Lot of what happens. So the question I have if, if we have a treatment that clearly has not received support as being evidence based, and we often get this comment, what, at least it does no harm, but are we obligated to tell a patient that there is no evidence based for what they're pursuing, even though it, quote, does no harm. And I used the example of 10s units. I mean, back to the days of the 90s with Rick deo, the data wasn't supportive in the last Cochran review basically says that there's really very little efficacy, maybe just, perhaps mostly placebo effect, with the with any of these 10s units with regard to the actual data. So do we actually tell a patient, inform a patient that? Yeah, you could, you could do this, but there is any any evidence for it.

Unknown Speaker  55:54  
Yeah, Ron, that's that's a powerful question. It really is, and, and I think that's why we're having this comp this conversation. It's, it's really a, it's a very, very challenging question to answer, because part of what you're trying to balance out is, do I unders? Does So number one, is it appropriate for the for the payers to deny care based on the fact that they've created reasons to deny care, and is it appropriate for peers to deny care despite the strong evidence that suggests that the care is necessary. And you know Ron, I think it comes down to, you know which side you're on. And as a physician, I think it's unethical for patients not to it's unethical for insured patients to not have access to care that they should, assuming clinical indications, and the evidence is strong. Now there are multiple layers to your question, Ron, and I really think it's going to take all day to really tease it out and peel it, or, you know, peel up the onion, but, but, but you really are diving into the concept of non maleficence and beneficence and and, and really, I think it's truly unfortunate, because eventually this impacts patient autonomy, and patients are really, not really, they're not in charge of making the decisions for their care. And Ron, I'm happy to talk more, but this, it's a very loaded question. It really is.

Unknown Speaker  57:31  
Thank you. Let's go to some of the

Unknown Speaker  57:35  
attendee questions,

Unknown Speaker  57:39  
and we have one please elaborate on how the principles of shared decision making in pain management align with and complement the concept of informed consent, particularly regarding patient autonomy and the exchange of information between healthcare providers and patients. Yeah,

Unknown Speaker  57:56  
I love that question. I really do. It's, it's important because, because it truly, it applies to what I do on a daily basis as an interventional pain physician and and Dr Shakman, we just put out a paper together with ESPN looking at, I mean, formal consent and a consensus guideline. I you know, that question brings me back to this slide. It really does, and I'll tell you why. When you think about informed consent in our space, the real question is, how much is too much, and how much is enough, recognizing that the degree of what is shared may not completely relate to what actually happens after the procedure, and I do think the simplest way to to really understand this is making sure when the informed consent is actually delivered to A patient, that this box is attained and accomplished. Here is why I got I come back to this model. I truly love this model, the informed consent. You know, shared decision making can be so impactful, because when you do it correctly, you build a relationship. Now that relationship is strong. Because if you have to go through all the nitty gritty details of the negative and positive outcomes from the intervention. You're going to be there all day. Okay. Now the second part is communication. And the communication part, if you had to allow the patient, or sit with the patient, to exhaust, really, all the potential questions that they have, you may not even leave that room. So the whole point is that consent, shared decision making, when done correctly, can maximize the relationship you have with the patient, enhanced communication that you have with the patient and. When it comes to consent with what which? What I hypothesize, although I you know not, it hasn't been fully studied, is that you're more likely to achieve an ethical encounter. And I think it goes back to car degens model, you'll find yourself using some of these four components and that can most likely actually enhance, um, your relationship with the patient, thereby making the consent process a lot easier. Now, I don't know if that answers your question, but you're going to be utilizing the concept of autonomy, beneficence, non maleficence and justice if you achieve a simple relationship and a simple communication with the shared decision making model. I think it's very attainable.

Unknown Speaker  1:00:44  
Thank you. So another question, I want to take the first shot at this one, because it's something I do a lot of work with, but I'd like to get your input to why, right? And the question is, access to information is increasingly easier for everyone, and many patients already come to the medical dental office with the prior consultation on Google about diagnosis, management and treatment. How do you see this new attitude of patients, and what is the best ethical and professional conduct? And my quick response to that is to check an article I think was published with Dr Keppel Hessel sink in the Netherlands, and I in 2017 on post modern pain medicine, where we look at this, you know, post modern movement, which suggests that everyone has an opinion, and everyone, everyone's opinion is equally valid. And Dr Keppel Hessel sink on his desk has a coffee mug that says on because I've seen it. It says, Do not confuse your PhD in Google with my medical degree. So this is constantly a problem that I hear from my colleagues and from my students. You know, what do you do when the patient knows everything and the wrong How do you get this across to them without alienating that individual? Why are any thoughts?

Unknown Speaker  1:02:06  
Oh, I love this question. It's like everyday life, but for all of us and and I think we my personal strategy, and I truly do love this model, and I it's I can stay on this slide all day, by the way, and when patients come to me with so much assumption, whether it's Google family members, prior treatments from other patients have that that are friends of yours, you know, respecting the autonomy that the patient, respecting the perspective of the patient, really addresses that concept of autonomy, right? They they come in with this information as knowledge, recognizing it. You don't have to, you don't have to necessarily agree to it, but acknowledging it, recognizing it really, really helps start the relationship, and you're pretty much indirectly addressing patient autonomy. Now, from a physician perspective, it is your responsibility to communicate the evidence as it pertains the clinical evidence as it pertains to the patient's symptoms and medical history. So it's clearly a battle, but I think the first step, which comes back to recognizing the patient's or acknowledging the patient's perspective, really does enhance, or at least addresses the questions of autonomy, of patient autonomy, but as your responsibility for the patient's well being, You can take it to the next level that haven't recognized what they discovered based on planning, habitations and options. They're tough conversations, but, but I do think when you utilize that approach, you're getting into this two components, and you can form a very strong relationship, or sometimes not a strong one, but at least an ethical relationship that can enhance a better dialog. That's a great question.

Unknown Speaker  1:04:08  
It is a really good question. And one of the other things just regarding that is when people are getting their information on the internet, there's this belief, well, it's on the internet, so it has to be true. And there's more, you know, pain management, misinformation and actually intentional disinformation on the internet than than one could imagine. And if you go onto social media, Twitter, especially, you'll see more mis and disinformation. And you come on as an expert and say, Well, this is just not true. Here. Look at this systematic review, which shows just the opposite, and then people get angry at you sometimes because you've suggested that their opinion is invalid, simply because the data don't hold up on it, and these people don't, don't understand data. Do one more quick question. Uh. Carmen

Unknown Speaker  1:05:00  
has his hand up, maybe.

Unknown Speaker  1:05:01  
Dr Chopra,

Unknown Speaker  1:05:11  
is he there?

Unknown Speaker  1:05:12  
I'm sorry. I got lost.

Unknown Speaker  1:05:17  
I was busy typing. I

Unknown Speaker  1:05:22  
I have become a patient myself

Unknown Speaker  1:05:26  
simply because of an injury I had a year and a half ago, and I'm now, shall we say, in the midst of trying to find out what my underlying problems are. So I truly appreciate this discussion, and I apologize for not being more of a participant,

Unknown Speaker  1:06:00  
and that's it. Oh, good. Good

Speaker 1  1:06:01  
to see you. Dr Crandall, you. You're focus on this deal has been extraordinary. So thank you.

Unknown Speaker  1:06:10  
I think we're going to need to close now unfortunately, and and I apologize the we had a lot of great questions, and because of the subject nature, they're very complex, and they're not 32nd answers. So I wish we'd had more time, because it's such a thought provoking talk. Dr, Coolidge, do you have any closing Thank you very

Speaker 1  1:06:32  
much for everyone, and thank you for everyone's support and thanks. Thanks for this wonderful presentation.

Unknown Speaker  1:06:40  
Thank you very much, Doctor, thanks everyone. We'll look forward to seeing you all next week.

Unknown Speaker  1:06:44  
Thank you. Thanks everybody.

Unknown Speaker  1:06:46  
Thank you. Bye, bye, bye.

Transcribed by https://otter.ai
