Speaker 1  0:00  
We're Welcome everyone. It's a little bit early. We have a lot of attendees today for the presentation by Dr Clow. Little bit of housekeeping and some additional introductory slides for a few minutes, but we're going to let everybody log on before

Unknown Speaker  0:24  
where we start you.

Unknown Speaker  1:17  
Welcome everyone the

Speaker 1  1:20  
Make sure to copy down for those seeking CME CE credits. The data is in the top right here, we'll mention it, and Dr fertino will put it in the chat section. Keep the questions in the Q, amp a section. But we are now up and working. Thanks for your patience with regard to some changes in the CE. If there's any barriers whatsoever, you could email the Karen or myself that will be in the chat. But I think we're in, hopefully in good shape. Today, we'll have some introductory, couple introductory slides Before introducing Dr Clow

Unknown Speaker  2:04  
And and Dr Dasilva, applause.

Speaker 1  3:14  
You welcome everyone. We'll be starting in about two minutes with our introductory slides and disclosures. Just remember the administrative content goes in the chat section and Q and A area for the questions, and if there's any administrative issues, we're all available in the chat to discuss those and afterwards As well,

Unknown Speaker  3:45  
we have a Few special announcements today. You

Speaker 1  4:56  
okay, let me take the liberty of starting. I want to quickly go through a couple. Of our disclosure slides, as well as some background slides with respect to some of the data from the program. Just to update folks again, upper right as the CME contact information texting that in it will be in the chat section. So don't you know, need to scurry to write it down right away. So and that's available for access for the better part of a week. I'll be introducing Dr Clow. We're very excited about having him as our speaker today, some background in terms of disclosures from our advisory board, as well as the directors here in terms of consultants, etc, as well as Dr Clow, just I promised only take a little more than a minute talking about this. We've been fortunate to have somewhere between two and maybe 500 clinicians now, where this is not commercial content, the directors are all working pro bono, including our speakers. We get CME support from Mass General Hospital below cost. We're really happy about that. We're now hitting about 35 countries, and we're providing access to about physicians, dentists, psychologists and nurses, but we're hitting about 30% as I said, of our attendees are in under medically underserved areas. So a couple little bit of data. Here's where we're hitting. Many from a number of countries. Preponderances the US and Canada, but number of other countries as well. We're really happy about the access we have. Dr Keith prepared the slide for us for our upcoming program, the 2425 and it sort of illustrates the areas we're spending time general pain, particularly policy education, certainly when basic research and we want to be accessible to patients, about 15% of our attendees and including our advisory board, or people who have personal experience with pain. Most importantly, I want to talk about an upcoming program, just for about 30 seconds, a minute here in November, right before I introduce Dr Clow, we're really excited about this. It's the TMD impact grant. Dr Alex Dasilva, from Michigan, is collaborating and heading this. Alex, you want to comment a moment on on this?

Unknown Speaker  7:30  
You're muted. Alex,

Speaker 2  7:33  
yes, good morning everyone. So this event is part of the impact grant from Nia NIDCR, and so we have investigators from University of Michigan, Massachusetts, General Hospital and Harvard School of Dental Medicine. And in this event, we have a one at ether dome at the imagh age, November 7 and November 8 at the Harvard School of Denton medicine. It will be in person and virtual. We will send the link for the virtual attendance too.

Unknown Speaker  8:07  
Thank you very much, everyone.

Speaker 1  8:10  
Okay, thanks. Dr Dasilva, okay, again, a reminder. Here's the code on upper right, what we'll immediately put that in the chat so you'll have access to that. Now, let me, I'll let you put up your slides, Dr Clow, and I'm gonna, just for my sake, pull up the introduction here as Dr Clow is pulling up his slides. Dr Daniel Clow is a professor of anesthesiology, medicine, rheumatology and Psychiatry at the University of Michigan. He began his academic career at Georgetown University after attending undergraduate and medical school at the University of Michigan. He was a faculty member at Georgetown from 1992 2002 serving as chief of division of rheumatology and Vice Chair of Medicine. Well at Georgetown, he founded the chronic pain and fatigue Research Center, and in 2002 was recruited to bring this group to the University of Michigan, where the group has become one of the most successful pain research groups in the world. He's also served as the first PI of the University of Michigan Clinical and Translational Sciences Award, as well as the first Associate Dean for clinical and translational research, and founded the Institute that houses the University of Michigan, CTSA and the Michigan Institute for Clinical and Health Research. He needs over 450 peer reviewed publications, over 100 million in federal funding, and CPF RC was recently awarded the NIH heal interdisciplinary team science award. He's been a very active mentor for multiple scientists and clinicians, serving as the primary mentor of 35 NIH K awards, nearly all of whom have gone to obtain RC. Or his funding, or the equivalent. It's really a delight to have him here. I followed his work for a number of years, dating us. He had been speaking and speak spoken with us at the request of a Tim the support group at the ether dome, many years ago. And we're delighted to have him back, and we'll be interested in continuing the collaboration. Dr Glau,

Unknown Speaker  10:25  
thanks very much.

Unknown Speaker  10:27  
Thanks so much, Ryan.

Speaker 3  10:33  
My disclosure slide of of note, I really hate opioids for chronic pain, and I've testified against opioid manufacturers. So I'm clinically trained as a rheumatologist, and I almost always start with this slide. This isn't as relevant for headache, because, again, we don't commonly when someone comes in with a headache, we don't commonly think it's something wrong in their brain or their head, although we rule out things like brain tumors, but in when pain presents in other areas of the body, people have a tendency to think that you can see pain on an x ray or an MRI. And I'm just going to again, I'm old, so I'm going to give you a little bit of historical view of what we now call nociplastic pain, and talk about a couple different areas, about post war pain syndromes and post infectious syndromes that you probably don't hear much about, but I think help really demonstrate the breadth of sort of this construct, and the fact that, although I'm here as a pain researcher talking to you about how we think of this in the field of pain, this syndrome of nociplastic pain clearly extends well outside the classic field of chronic pain. But until the 1990s or so, we actually did think that you could see pain on an x ray. We thought that the person on the left that has an entirely normal knee X Ray would never have pain, and the person on the right that has bone on bone, osteoarthritis would always have pain. And it's not that surprising to most people that 10 or 15% of people with an X ray like the one on the left have some pain, because there's a lot of things that you wouldn't see on a plane x ray. But it is surprising to most people that don't do research in conditions like osteoarthritis that 30 or 40% of the people in the United States that have this X ray don't have any pain. They have bone on bone, they've lost all their cartilage, and they don't have any pain and and so I'm going to talk today about nociplastic Pain in the in the research into nociplastic pain has not just helped us understand how and why these individuals with without anything demonstrably wrong with their knee, can have pain. It also helps us explain why so many people that have severe anatomic damage in the periphery do not have pain. So this is basically my career of 35 or so years of being trained as a physician, I was trained as a rheumatologist, that osteoarthritis was the classic peripheral pain syndrome, and it wasn't until the 1990s that studies in low back pain and osteoarthritis started to show how poor the relationship was between what you saw on an x ray or An MRI and whether someone was experiencing pain or not, and when we see people that have pain that you can't see anything wrong on an x ray or an MRI, we immediately think that they must have prominent psychological factors like anxiety or depression or catastrophizing causing their pain. But it turns out that that's actually usually not the case. I'm not trying to deny the import of psychological factors in chronic pain, but they don't usually cause chronic pain, and some of the therapies that we thought worked really well 30 or 40 years ago, like NSAIDs and acetaminophen and opioids and even joint replacement surgery, actually often do not lead to pain relief, and the latest Cochrane meta analyzes suggest that the effect size of NSAIDs is actually quite modest. It's point 3.4 but NSAIDs in osteoarthritis of the knee don't work any better than a drug like pregabalin works in fibromyalgia. All of our analgesic drugs have, at best, small to modest effect sizes, no matter where we use them. So I'm going to talk a little bit about fibromyalgia, but more use it as a metaphor, rather than as a standalone diagnosis. Again, in the 1990s when I was being trained, people didn't really believe that Fibromyalgia was a real disease. The first criteria for fibromyalgia appeared in 1990 they require that people had widespread pain plus a certain number of tender points. These are areas that if you apply about nine pounds of pressure in these 18 regions of the body and someone says they hurt, that's considered a positive tender point. We didn't know at the time these criteria were developed, that. Women are a lot more tender than men, and because of that, these criteria inadvertently almost always identified females that these 1990 criteria, 93% of the individuals that would meet criteria for fibromyalgia in United States or anywhere else were female. Because this, these criteria unknowingly sort of bias the diagnosis towards female by requiring a certain amount of tenderness. The newer criteria for fibromyalgia that don't require a tender point count, fibromyalgia is only about one and a half or two times more common in women than in men, and that's true of almost every chronic pain condition, not just fibromyalgia, but over the last 30 to 40 years, there's been a pretty dramatic sea change in how conditions like fibromyalgia are thought of, going from conditions where people didn't even believe that these individuals were experiencing pain to now five or so years ago, where The iesp, the international group of pain researchers formally voted and said there's a third mechanism of pain. Unfortunately, they called it nociplastic pain, and so I don't like the term, but I like the fact that the international group of pain researchers formally voted and sort of codified this concept, that this third mechanism, or descriptor of pain, nociplastic pain, is very common and very important in the field of chronic pain, and that one of the ways to identify these individuals with nociplastic Pain is they don't just have pain. They have other symptoms coming from the central nervous system, because first and foremost, nociplastic pain seems to be a CNS driven problem, not a peripherally driven problem. And so I've been using this analogy for about 20 or so years. I recently did a friendly debate with Michael gold, who is an incredible sort of preclinical peripheral pain researcher, talking about the interplay between peripheral and central factors. And I asked Michael if he thought this analogy was apt, and he actually thought it was okay, so I'll continue to use it. And that is that the amount of pain that someone is experiencing is like the allowedness of an electric guitar. And there's two ways you can make an electric guitar louder. You can either strum the strings harder, or you can turn up the amplifier, and the strings of the electric guitar are analogous to all the different types of sensory nerves that we have going to different areas of the body that are picking up heat or cold, or picking up nociceptive input, or picking up where your joint is in space. But any of this information, in order for it to be felt as pain, has to go up through the spinal cord and all the way up to the brain before it can be felt as pain. And humans have fairly robust descending pathways, and the inhibitory pathways, the descending analgesic pathways, are typically more active than the descending facilitator pathways, and because of this, these pathways inhibit the upward transmission of a lot of information, a peripheral input that wouldn't serve any adaptive purpose. Most of you are probably sitting in a chair while you're listening to this talk. You have no susceptors Firing constantly in your back and your buttocks, but it's not of any adaptive purpose for you to feel this is pain. I mean, because of that, most of you have enough descending analgesic activity so that you're not feeling pain right now. But I joke about this when I give talks to groups of patients or even groups of providers, that the length of time that you can sit in a chair before your back and your buttocks starts hurting is actually a good marker of like, what your personal amplifier is set at. And there's marked differences in individuals with respect to their amplifier setting. And it turns out that women, on average, have a much higher amplifier setting than men, and this is probably one of the big reasons that women have about one and a half to two times the rate of any type of chronic pain than men. Is it simply that they're in the central nervous system. Women are more pain sensitive and they're also more sensory sensitive, and I'm going to talk a lot about this, but no so plastic pain. People are not just more sensitive to pain with respect to the brain and the amplifier, they're more sensitive to the brightness of lights, the loudness of noises, odors, and in recent studies that we're just finishing right now where we've looked done quantitative sensory testing in a number of different disease states to see what predicts when people are going to respond to surgery if They have pain or what restricts if they're going to respond to a new Dmart or anti rheumatic drug, if they have an autoimmune disease, people's perception of how bright a light is when we shine it in their eyes is a very strong predictor of non responsiveness to for example, surgery when people have. Of joint replacement surgery, and so this nociplastic pain, one of the first things that I want to emphasize is these individuals are not just pain sensitive. They're sensory sensitive

Speaker 3  20:13  
to any type of sensory stimuli, and this is responsible for a lot of the symptoms that these individuals experience. They also, if you look at the far right side of the screen, the two left types of pain we've known about forever, nociceptive pain and neuropathic pain. But again, we know that these individuals with centralized or no the plastic pain, their pain is more widespread. They are sensitive to other types of sensory stimuli, and they have these other CNS symptoms like sleep problems, fatigue, memory problems and mood problems that are core to nociplastic pain. And so I'm just going to talk really briefly and rapidly about clinical studies, mechanistic studies, treatment implications, and then very briefly about some of the controversies. So again, you're seeing this term more and more. This is a lancet article some of us wrote about nociplastic pain, and there's agreement about the fact that this pathophysiologically, there's augmented CNS, pain and sensory processing, as well as the fact that these other symptoms, like fatigue, sleep problems, memory problems and mood problems are core to this kind of pain. They're not just an ancillary thing, and that the in many studies that we and other groups are doing at where we look at nuance that have nociplastic pain and children are adolescents, these symptoms typically antedate the pain. Sleep Problems are usually the first things we see in kids or adolescents that are on their way to developing new nose of plastic pain. Then you see the fatigue and the memory problems. Then you see the pain. But again, more and more studies are showing that these other CNS symptoms are really core to this syndrome. Another new set of terms you're going to hear more and more are chronic, overlapping pain conditions, a parallel term that is being used more outside of the United States, our primary pain conditions. This is a ICD 10 ICD 11 term. And primary pain essentially means that the pain is the primary problem. It's not due to osteoarthritis or rheumatoid arthritis or some other disease that the pain seems to be the primary problem. The classic chronic overlapping pain conditions are headache and tension. Headache is fully in the cop C's. Migraine is sort of half in and half out. I'll talk a little bit about that, but we can talk about in the question and answer session, fibromyalgia, irritable bowel TMD, bladder pain syndrome, low back pain, endometriosis, these are all considered to be part of chronic overlapping pain conditions. And notice one of these here, chronic fatigue syndrome, the pain is not nearly as prominent in CFS as the fatigue, the memory problems and the sleep disturbance. And we see that in a lot of these nociplastic pain syndromes that not all of the individuals have pain as their most prominent complaint in some individuals, the memory problems, the sleep problems, the fatigue are actually more troublesome. And in addition to these conditions where nociplastic Pain is front and center, we know these same nociplastic mechanism plays significant roles in all pain conditions, about a third of individuals that start with an autoimmune disease like rheumatoid arthritis or lupus will develop superimposed central sensitization or nociplastic pain, and this occurs in sickle cell disease, erectanlose syndrome, any pain syndrome, over time, will become more and more centralized and more and more nociplastic This is a recent review article we wrote in Nature Reviews neurology, talking about the sort of pathogenic features of nociplastic pain as well as the treatments that work. And again, I'm going to talk about a couple of these very briefly to give you a broader context. Those of you in the field of pain think of pain, but I want to broaden this a little bit and talk about that these fibromyalgia, like pain conditions, can occur after people are deployed to war, after people have certain types of infections. And now we're realizing that long COVID is probably one of these sort of nosoplastic syndromes. In addition to, again, what you all know and what I'm going to mainly focus on, is that this is often a comorbidity in chronic pain conditions. In this Nature Reviews article, we talked about all the different risk factors for developing nociplastic pain. And again, I'm just going to talk about a couple of these, because most pain researchers are not familiar with these, but they help you, give you a broader context about what nociplastic syndromes really are. So it turns out that infections can trigger any of these conditions in approximately 10% of individuals. So the type of infections that historically we've known trigger a post. Infectious syndrome would be Epstein Barr Virus, Lyme disease. A number of different infections are have been historically known to cause this, and it's only infections that cause diffuse pain and fatigue that lasts for a week or so that trigger this that like common upper respiratory infections, like the common cold, don't trigger the development of sort of chronic fatigue syndrome or post infectious syndromes, but things like Epstein Barr Virus, Ross River Virus Q, fever, COVID, do trigger this in about 10% of individuals that are exposed to these more severe infections. It turns out that almost any type of infectious diarrhea will trigger irritable bowel in about 10% of individuals, and a bunch of different types of urinary tract infections trigger chronic prostatitis or interstitial cystitis. So we know that this occurs, that these infectious triggers can develop the nociplastic pain. And again, this is a super cool study that was done a long time ago in Australia that actually showed that after three markedly different types of infection, the Epstein Barr Virus, Q, fever and Borreliosis, even though the acute manifestations of those three types of infections are very different, about 10% of people that had each of those three disparate infections developed a post infectious syndrome that looked exactly like chronic fatigue syndrome, fibromyalgia, and again, all three of those conditions led to the exact same about 10% of individuals this was not associated with clearance of The pathogen, with the acute inflammatory response, psychological factors, the biggest thing that predicted whether someone was going to develop one of these post infectious syndromes is whether they had some of these symptoms of fatigue or sleep or memory problems prior to the infection. And so several of us wrote, four months after the pandemic, the COVID pandemic started. We published this article in pain and said there will be a post infectious long COVID syndrome that will look a lot like post dBV syndrome and post Lyme syndrome and post SARS syndrome. No one paid attention to us, and it's only now that the couple billion dollars that are being spent by the NIH and the US to study long COVID are coming to this conclusion that long COVID Probably is largely, again, one of these syndromes, that is, that we've seen over and over and over, that infections can trigger this so can war. I'm old. I was very involved in looking at the health consequences of the first Gulf War that the United States was involved in. And after that war, it became clear that after every war that the US has ever been involved in, there's a group of veterans that come back with multifocal pain, fatigue, sleep problems and memory problems. We call it something different after every war, after the Civil War in the 1860s in the United States, this was called soldier's heart. It was called shell shock in World War One and World War Two. But again, we know that after every war that a group of veterans will come back with these sort of nosap plastic syndromes, multifocal pain, fatigue, memory problems and sleep disturbance. We just had a big conference at the University of Michigan where we devoted an entire day talking about post war syndromes. And it's becoming increasingly clear it's not just the veterans who fight in these wars, the general civilian populations in countries like Ukraine and Israel and Gaza that are torn by war have very high rates of these fibromyalgia, chronic fatigue syndromes. And the people that are providing for care in these countries, these are a group of individuals from Ukraine that we invited to this conference. We spent a week with them and help teach them how to take care of these conditions, because, again, they're seeing sort of an epidemic in the general population, as well as in the veterans in Ukraine, because of the fact that this is such a war torn country, cancer researchers have seen the same cluster and column the cancer symptom cluster. But again, I want to present this data to give you a sense from outside the field of pain that this syndrome is very common, and you see it virtually everywhere.

Speaker 3  29:24  
So in the Nature Reviews article, we talk about the mechanisms that are involved in the nociplastic pain and fibromyalgia, there's a fairly stereotypical set of things that you see in functional brain imaging. You see a decrease in facilitator connectivity, a decrease in inhibitory connectivity. It's like the brain is hyperactive, and that some of the normal filtering mechanisms that are responsible for not allowing this information from the periphery to come up, to be brain to the brain to be filled with pain, are deficient or absent in these individuals. But But again, we. See that some of these abnormalities actually, in a recent article that Chelsea Kaplan and our group published, mining the large ABCD study, some of these imaging findings in children that subsequently go on to develop Fibromyalgia like pain are present actually at baseline before the kids develop any symptoms whatsoever, you can sort of image this risk factor or this diathesis. And so this is the the first fMRI study that was done in fibromyalgia, was done by our group and published in 2002 and all this study really did was show that when people with fibromyalgia, when we gave them a low intensity stimulus, they really were experiencing pain, because we could see that areas like the primary and secondary somatosensory cortices were being activated even though we were just giving low intensity stimuli. Our group and others have gone on to show that the two brain regions are either too connected to each other or not connected enough to each other in these nociplastic Pain states, as well as the fact that even the size and the shape of the brain changes in these nociplastic Pain states, we think this is due to neuroplasticity. And by the way, our group thinks that the same kind of neuroplasticity that we see in the brain in chronic pain, is responsible what's being for, what's being called small fiber neuropathy, that it's just, we think it's just functional reorganization the peripheral nervous system, and that it doesn't have anything to do with the pathogenesis of pain. One of the big NIH networks that we were involved in is the map network that was studying the condition that used to be called interstitial cystitis, and is now called bladder pain syndrome. But we brought a large number of individuals with the condition interstitial cystitis into this network, and we did brain imaging and all sorts of other tests in them. But one of the most striking findings in this network was that even though this label was interstitial cystitis, only about 20% of people on a body map only had pain in their bladder region. About 20% of people with interstitial cystitis had more regional pain involving their bladder and their abdomen, but about 60% of people look more like fibromyalgia patients in that they had widespread pain, fatigue, memory problem of sleep disturbance, even though the label that they were carrying was interstitial cystitis. And so we were interested in contrasting the individuals with interstitial cystitis that had pain just in their bladder with the individuals with interstitial cystitis that had pain in their bladder but had widespread pain. And what we found on functional imaging is that the people with interstitial cystitis that only had pain in their bladder looked almost identical to healthy controls and functional MRI, whereas the people with interstitial cystitis that had the widespread pain phenotype, even though what they were being called was interstitial cystitis and functional imaging, they looked almost identical to fibromyalgia patients. So again, we can sort of image this brain that seems to be hyper responsive to painful stimuli, hyper responsive to other type of sensory stimuli. It may be the case that the endogenous opioid system is participating in the pathogenesis of these nociplastic Pain states, and this may be one of the reasons it's it's such a bad idea to use opioids to treat chronic pain. I know those of you in the headache field have been recommending against opioid use forever, just like those of us in the fibromyalgia field have been recommending against opioid use forever, but people don't necessarily listen to us, and they're still widely using opioids. And I'm concerned that opioids don't just not take make pain better, that they actually, in some individuals, giving them an opioid mechanistically, will actually make their pain worse and worse over time, and one of the reasons for that is a study we did where we used pet with Carfentanil, a highly potent opioid and functional MRI at the same time in people with fibromyalgia, and it literally looked as though the endogenous opioid system was releasing too much endorphins and enkephalins, and that over release of endogenous opioids, of endorsements and keflins was leading to opioid induced hyperalgesia. So in this article, we said we think that nociplastic pain might be, in part, endogenous opioid induced hyperalgesia, because we think that the endogenous opioid system may be hyperactive in contributing to this sort of wind up that we see in these individuals. And one of the reasons that I rant about this all the time is These are data from last year showing that in the United States, in 2023 40% of fibromyalgia patients are either getting oxycodone or hydrocodone, strong opioids for which there's absolutely. No evidence that they work. And so again, I give an hour long talks on the problems with opioids. I'm just going to give a five minute rant about this. But the first thing you should understand as someone who's done been involved in litigation and has seen a lot of data and FDA files and things like that, is there's actually not a single study that has lasted for 12 weeks or longer of a pure mu opioid that shows that opioids actually, in a parallel group, randomized control trial, are effective in treating chronic pain, and the only studies that are carried out longer term, for up to a year, are studies of drugs like buprenorphine or to pentadol, which are mixed opioids and really have entirely different profiles than a pure mu opioid like oxycodone or hydrocodone, which are the ones that are being primarily used. The other thing that a lot of providers are not aware of is addiction is not the primary safety issue with opioid use and chronic pain, all cause mortality is the primary safety issue. If someone that has chronic pain is taking an opioid, the risk of them dying of any cause is about double, and that's because they're at higher risk of developing, of dying of a motor traffic accident if they're on opioids, higher risk of suicide, higher risk of MIS there's a tremendous number of things that opioids kill you from that are not addiction, that that a lot of providers and patients are unaware of, this dramatic increase in all cause mortality. And again, there's a very real possibility that opioids make pain worse in a subset of individuals, not just don't make pain better. Two studies I'm going to show you that that scare me, because, again, there are no industry funded trials that show that opioids work. This is a famous study done by Aaron Krebs. It was published about six years ago that showed it in chronic pain patients with back pain that NSAIDs and opioids. The the main finding was that, looking at pain interference, that opioids were no better than non steroidals. But look at the second line here. People didn't pay attention to this. There was actually a statistically significant worsening in pain intensity in the people that were randomized to get opioids at one year, compared to the people that not were randomized to get NSAIDs at one year. And then this is a more recent trial that was done for acute low back pain and neck pain, again, randomizing people to either opioids or NSAIDs, carried out for a year. It wasn't the primary outcome measure, but buried in there, first of all, are the tables that show that the opioid treated patients are worse in every way possible at all points in time. They have higher rates of anxiety, depression, everything, they just look worse in every possible way. And then this graph should be scary to anyone that ever gives a chronic pain patient an opioid again, it's flipped the opposite of what you would hope to see if you thought an opioid was working for chronic pain, and that the people that were treated with an opioid had a higher pain intensity at one year than the people that were treated with NSAIDs. And so I joke about this, but this should be a cortical tattoo that that anyone that's prescribing an opioid for chronic pain. I hope that if that, if nothing else from this talk, that you remember this slide, and this is permanently etched into your brain, that there's a lot of data suggesting that opioids actually make pain worse the longer you use them.

Speaker 3  38:37  
And this is a cool study that was done recently showing that even a condition like knee osteoarthritis, using GWAS and using genetic analyzes, it looks like about half of the pain in osteoarthritis is coming from peripheral factors, and about half of the pain is coming from Central factors. And this prompted me to write an editorial. I was asked to write an editorial in response to this article, chiding is, why doesn't everyone use a body map in every chronic pain patient? Because even in our group, where we do functional brain imaging and all the quantitative sensory testing and all these really cool things, right now, a body map, just getting a body map on a chronic pain patient tells you probably more about what's going to work and what's not going to work in that patient than almost anything. The more widespread their pain is, the more regions of pain they have, the more likely their pain is coming from the central nervous system, and the less likely that peripherally directed treatments are going to work. And again, some studies are actually suggesting that we can sort of image this vulnerability of nociplastic pain vulnerability. This is the study that I was alluding to earlier, that Chelsea was a leader author of that showed that in kids that are healthy and pain free that in the next year do develop multi site pain on brain imaging, they have half of the findings of fibromyalgia while they're asymptomatic at age nine. Pain before they develop any pain. And this is a different study that Irene Tracy was involved in that was published recently, that showed that you could predict the individuals who are going to develop chemotherapy induced neuropathic pain by doing brain imaging. Because you're imaging how the central nervous system is going to respond to that damaged nerve. I don't actually think that a damaged nerve in and of itself is always painful. Most types of neuropathy. About half of the people have painless neuropathy, and about half of the people have painful neuropathy, and our group thinks that that's largely due to how the central nervous system responds to that damaged nerve, not to the damaged nerve per se. So when we go back to the slide, one of the first things we have to realize is that these names down here are, they're all mixed pain states that a third of people with osteoarthritis or autoimmune disorders or cancer pain also have central sensitization, fibromyalgia, nociplastic pain. So and when people have multiple pain mechanisms, you're going to have to use treatments that are based on those pain mechanisms. Again, just because someone carries the label of osteoarthritis doesn't mean that the preferred treatment for this individual might be a drug like duloxetine that is clearly working in the central nervous system. And so these are the new Fibromyalgia criteria. They look at how widespread the pain is. On the left by asking people to check boxes in a body map. They ask about the symptoms, like memory problems, sleep problems and fatigue, and they're scored. This is scored from zero to 31 and we think this is right now the best measure for the degree of nociplastic pain that someone has a body map alone isn't bad. But I think by asking people about fatigue, sleep problems and memory problems, you can predict additional variants. And Fred Wolf is a Fibromyalgia researcher that pointed out that we shouldn't think of fibromyalgia or nociplastic paint, or yes or no, the different people have different degrees of this. And he coined the term Fibromyalgia ness to indicate this, I'm not suggesting you use this term. I'm suggesting you understand the concept that it's better to think of this, that people have differing degrees or different volume control settings, rather than to think of fibromyalgia or nociplastic pain or being yes or no. And to give you an example of how powerful a body map is, imagine that you're not a headache specialist, you're a knee specialist, and someone comes into you with knee pain, and you're thinking about whether you should do surgery or not. Well, if you don't give a body map, and someone comes into you with knee pain, you might think that they're going to respond to knee replacement surgery, but is someone with this body map likely to respond if you inject their knee or do surgery on their knee, the intuitive thing would be no. And I'll show you some data that shows like, really no. And so we actually have used the fibromyalgia measure in the perioperative period, first in knee and hip replacement surgery, and then subsequently in his in women with chronic pelvic pain that we're getting a hysterectomy to control their pain, and we showed that someone's score on the fibromyalgia measure on the day of surgery is highly predictive of how much opioid they're going to need to control their acute pain. The higher their score, the less well that opioids are going to work to control their acute pain. Don't get me started on treating their chronic pain with this as well as the higher the score in the fibromyalgia measure, the less likely that people were going to respond to the surgery. So in these studies, we didn't just collect the fibromyalgia measure. We collected anxiety, depression, catastrophizing, but on the day of surgery, we gave people this Fibromyalgia measure, which can be scored zero to 31 and again, our main hypothesis was that this measure would be predictive of surgery non responsiveness and opioid non responsiveness, and it was dramatically predictive is that each one point increase in the fibromyalgia score people needed nine milligrams more of omes to control their acute pain in the first 24 to 48 hours, each one point Increase in the fibromyalgia score made people less surgery responsive. These phenomena were linear, just like Fred said, there wasn't anything magical where the a score of 13 or higher, and that Fibromyalgia measure is said to be diagnostic of fibromyalgia. But it didn't matter if someone had 13 or higher, or they had 10 or 11 or whatever. Each one point increase in the fibromyalgia score made people less surgery responsive and less opioid responsive. And I'll just show that here is that these are two individuals with different Fibromyalgia scores. On the x axis here on the bottom is the fibromyalgia score. On the y axis is the number of people that had that score. So this study had about 700 people in it that got their knee or their hip replaced. This person here doesn't have fibromyalgia because he doesn't have a Fibromyalgia score of greater than 13. But look at how different these two people were after they had knee replacement surgery. Patient B would need 90 milligrams more. Of omes, of opioid to control his acute pain, and patient B would be five times less likely to have a 50% improvement in his pain if he did go on to have his knee operated on. And

Speaker 3  45:12  
then we exactly replicated those findings in subsequent studies in women getting hysterectomy for chronic pelvic pain. And so why is this all important? Well, this is one of the reasons that the treatments that work for acute pain and work somewhat well for nociceptive pain, like NSAIDs, opioids, these drugs down here don't work at all for this kind of pain. And so the first thing is you have to use different types of drugs, tricyclic drugs, serotonin norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors and gabapentinoids are the most effective drugs to treat the spectrum of illness. And then again, instead of giving people opioids where there's some evidence that drugs like low dose naltrexone, where we're actually blocking the endogenous opioid system, might be helpful in treating this, and the drug duloxetine, to give you an example, we at the time that duloxetine was approved for use in chronic low back pain and in chronic musculoskeletal pain in the United States, we didn't know who with low back pain this was going to work in but subsequent studies showed that if you take someone with low back pain and you give them A body map, you can identify the people who are going to be more responsive to duloxetine, the people who have more sites of pain on the body map are going to be more likely to respond to duloxetine. And in this study, people the The study showed that if someone had five or more sites of pain besides the back and even though their diagnosis was low back pain, that these people were 60% more likely to respond to duloxetine than someone that had low back pain but only had a single site of pain in the back and similarly for osteoarthritis, duloxetine is going to work better if someone has multifocal pain, rather than just pain in one region of the body. I suspect this is true for using geloxitine in headache patients, but I don't know of any studies that have actually shown this. But I also I want to emphasize how important the use of non drug therapies are in these pain syndromes, because drugs and procedures are sort of working up at the top here. But when someone has chronic pain, they develop increased stress, they become less active, they sleep poor they gain weight, they develop bad habits, and we have to use non pharmacologic therapies to treat those conditions. When I wrote a review article on fibromyalgia and published it in JAMA 10 years or so ago, these were the non pharmacologic therapies that had a good evidence base. And notice that a lot of the non pharmacologic therapies were in weak evidence. There was only one flavor of cowginative behavioral therapy, and there was only one type of exercise that we thought worked for nociplastic pain. Now look at a 2024, version of this. First of all, you see that all of these things that used to be down here moved up. The evidence base for all these non pharmacologic therapies is increasing dramatically as studies are being done in different pain syndromes of yoga, tai chi, bio feedback, acupuncture, acupressure, the evidence base keeps increasing dramatically, and now we even have five types of cognitive behavioral therapy. We can use classic pain based CBT. We can use brief CBT, empowered. We can do CBT for insomnia, acceptance, Commitment Therapy, emotional awareness therapy. There's a whole potpourri of cognitive behavioral approaches now that and again, different subsets of chronic pain patients are going to probably respond different to different types of therapy. This is a website that our group developed by Dave Williams, that is under a lot of testing in different NIH trials, because we think that websites and apps can be really helpful to get people some of these therapies that we now refer to as integrative therapies, these therapies that we used to be dismissive of and call complementary and alternative therapies, like acupuncture, acupressure, yoga, are now mainstream therapies, and the preferred term for these therapies are things like integrative therapies. I always like showing this slide because in the VA in the DoD medical centers in the United States, these are all the treatments that are theoretically available, all of these integrative therapies now are reimbursed within the VA and DoD systems. This is more of an aspiration to most of us that take care of chronic pain patients. We'd love for our patients to have access to all of these therapies and to have third party payers cover these therapies, but most insurance doesn't cover most of these therapies now, and most patients, and because of that, don't have access to most of these therapies. So really quickly, what is the role of psychological factors in this spectrum of illness? Some people this article implied that all people with conditions like. Fibromyalgia have prominent psychological factors driving their pain. We wrote a editorial pushing back on this and saying that that's way too simplistic, that in a lot of individuals with conditions like fibromyalgia or nociplastic pain, the sleep problems, the fatigue, the memory problems, there's a lot of other ways that you can get to know some plastic pain and focusing inordinately on the psychological comorbidities. And there's also a lot of slides that suggest that the anxiety, the depression and catastrophizing that people with chronic pain develop, it's because of the pain, and if you make the pain better, you will often make those psychological comorbidities better. Another reason we feel this way is that a new onset of fibromyalgia in children, mood disorders like problems with anxiety and depression, were not a risk for developing new Fibromyalgia in children. Sleep Problems were attention or memory problems were being a female was but having negative affect was not associated with the subsequent development of new multi site pain or new fibromyalgia. Small fiber neuropathy. I don't think small fiber neuropathy has been shown to cause hardly anything in the field of chronic pain. I think this is just much ado about nothing. I just gave a talk at the International pain meetings about this, and this was the slide that I think everyone should look at. This is a review article that I had nothing to do with. It was published a couple years ago that shows all the different medical conditions that have been associated with small fiber neuropathy, and notice all of these conditions, most of which are not in any way associated with chronic pain. So people that have only heard about small fiber neuropathy from the advocates of this concept in the pain field don't get shown this slide and don't get shown that small fiber neuropathy has been shown in almost any condition where it's been looked for. It's an incredibly non specific finding that, again, has not yet been shown in any way to cause pain. And then finally, there's some people that are claiming that conditions like fibromyalgia are autoimmune diseases. I have to play whack a mole and debate these individuals as well. Again, there's overwhelming evidence. Rheumatologist, a long time ago, discarded the term fibrositis because we could see that this was really quite different than rheumatoid arthritis or lupus, which are autoimmune diseases, and where the inflammation strikes you in the face that these conditions, the like fibromyalgia, in fact, are not autoimmune diseases. So I'll stop there and take any questions that people might have. Thank you. Thank

Unknown Speaker  52:43  
Dr Clow, extraordinary presentation. Thank

Speaker 1  52:45  
you. And we have a number of questions in the Q and A, and we'll get to through those as best as we can. And we've promoted a couple colleagues as panelists here. I'm just, let me just start off by asking one question, because in looking at your presentation, there's, from my standpoint, there's not a lot that I certainly I would disagree with, but I mentioned, but you mentioned psycho psychological factors, initially you started talking about those not being predictors of outcome, and I think of trauma and PTSD. And had a couple slides sort of suggesting that, but then you also presented slides with war trauma and so on and so forth, which sort of speaks to PTSD as predictor. And there's certainly a robust literature on trauma being at least somewhat of a predictor of treatment resistant pain syndromes. My concern is there's always folks that would really like to not ask questions of the patient about trauma and history, and that this not be a ticket to avoiding that, because they could focus on other other thoughts. I again, I found some of the data you presented sort of essentially conflicting.

Speaker 3  54:03  
So I entirely agree with you, Ron. I think that people should ask about trauma. What I am bothered by is that article that we pushed back on said everyone with fibromyalgia has this, you know, psychological problem, and that you probably know this therapeutically, if you approach someone you know with chronic pain that has anxiety and depression and that is not their primary problem, it's really more depression that's reactive to the fact that they can't live a normal life because of their pain that those individuals are resent you viewing like the psychological factors as their major problem, rather than something that's sort of downstream of having chronic pain and so all I'm really and in that article that we wrote that push back on this, one of the co authors of the article has been involved in a. Out of the really large epidemiologic studies of chronic, widespread pain, slash fibromyalgia, and he could calculate that adverse childhood experiences or ACEs might like in a big population based study account for about 8% of the individuals with conditions like fibromyalgia. So that's the is like, yes, there are. There is a group of people with chronic pain where this is being caused and driven by trauma, but there's also a big group where it's not, and where those people sometimes resent that, you know, putting the psychological thing as the major cause of their pain. And so I'm really just trying to get people to realize there's a continuum. And don't think that every time you see someone with anxiety or depression or catastrophizing or adverse childhood experiences in the background, for that matter, that that's the cause of their nosap plastic pain, because the data suggest it's more complicated than that. Well,

Speaker 1  55:59  
you say CBT is a strong as strong evidence, right?

Speaker 3  56:04  
And I think that we're trying to still figure out the some of the most exciting cognitive behavioral approaches are things like emotional awareness therapy, which may actually specifically help these people with trauma, because it is more of a trauma based therapy. And some of the early reports of EA T are that you identify people that some of the people that you give this to, like, are cured of their pain, or get 7080, 90% better that you don't see with plain old pain? CBT, so I think these approaches are really exciting, and we're trying to do studies now that say, you know, what are the baseline factors that so you can identify someone where these kind of trauma based cognitive behavioral approaches, you know, may work very well, and you should approach that and give those people this therapy. But again, if I had to put this in just a guess, I'd say probably 20, 30% of chronic pain patients might really benefit from this, these kinds of approaches where the psychological thing is front and center and is causing their pain, and if you treat it as such, they might benefit in the other 60 or 70% it's an important symptom, and it needs to be addressed, but it isn't necessarily pathogenically causing their pain. And the driving thing that if you make that better, you're going to make them better.

Unknown Speaker  57:26  
Dr Dasilva,

Unknown Speaker  57:30  
Alex, you you're opened up.

Speaker 2  57:31  
Yes, excellent talk. Dan, I would like to ask you, especially because chronic pain, many of the chronic disorders are associated with gender and and sex difference. So what are the evidence from your group or from other groups that biological, neurologically, you have to explain that many of this chronic pain disorders affect the more woman, for example, than men.

Speaker 3  58:07  
So we and others have done studies that show that if you do quantitative sensory testing in girls and boys before puberty, they they're not. They are identical. Girls and boys are, they have the same sort of pain processing, and we see this in the ABCD data as well. After girls go through puberty, that's when you see the onset of a lot of these chronic overlapping pain conditions. And that's where you see sort of after adolescence that girls, slash women develop this one and a half to two times increased frequency of almost every chronic pain syndrome in conditions like osteoarthritis. You can look at this really easily, because you can image like what's going on in the knee versus whether someone experiences pain. And going back to what I was showing that slide I showed really early, where I said 30 or 40% of the people in the United States that have that X ray, that's bone on bone, don't have any pain. Those are almost all men, because, again, on average, men are in the central nervous system, are less pain sensitive. The current evidence suggests that it's not female sex hormones that are driving this. It's actually the absence of testosterone that there's a lot of data that suggests that male sex hormones are anti nociceptive, and that that actually may more so, because we have these experiments in nature, we have pregnancy and menopause, where estrogens go super high or go to non existent, and those don't reproducibly cause any change in pain sensitivity and quantitative sensory testing and things like that. So in a lot of evidence, including a study that we're involved in of transgender individuals that are getting gender affirming therapy, people. That are transitioning from female to male by using androgens, or people that are transitioning from male to female by using androgen blockers. This is a experiment that is now being done by a lot of individuals, and we're just super imposing research. But again, a lot of the data is suggesting that the individuals who transition in the direction of males have less pain over time, and the people that transition in the female direction have more pain because they essentially convert hormonally, you know, to the the milieu that will make them more pain sensitive.

Unknown Speaker  1:00:37  
Thank you very much.

Speaker 1  1:00:38  
We have a number of questions in the Q and A, and when I get to most of these, Gary hair, you have a question you were in a Q and A, and I'll get to you and other folks, Gary, you want to open up? Hi

Unknown Speaker  1:00:50  
Dan, good morning. Alex, nice to see you both.

Unknown Speaker  1:00:55  
As a clinician, I

Unknown Speaker  1:00:56  
just would like to comment on the importance of the message that Dan has brought to us today, as far as listening to the patient, because we in oral facial pain, will see numerous patients with inappropriate or misdirected treatment based on treating the site of pain rather than the source. And when we listen to the patients as and we use the ACR form routinely in our clinic to screen or map the patient's pain. And the fact is that when you have a patient who comes in wearing sunglasses on a cloudy day and a sweater on a warm day, and is can't sit in the particular chair in the restaurant because the wind is always on their neck from the air conditioning and so on or so on, and you can recognize, even in a patient interview, these hypersensitive patients, and you have a choice between, for example, an invasive procedure or a non invasive procedure. I would admonish our colleagues in dentistry and in orofacial pain to steer clear of doing something that would be more invasive. It's if possible,

Unknown Speaker  1:02:03  
the importance, I think, of recognition,

Unknown Speaker  1:02:06  
because then, you know, you spoke systemic and so on. But the fact is that in the orofacial pain field, we see these conditions of idiopathic dental alveolar pain, which has got 900 other names that you can go through the internet and find that we need to be aware of as this essential mechanism that you've discussed. And I just would like to it's not a question, it's a comment on I'm always excited to hear what you have to say, and that that message, I think, has to be brought very clearly to our colleagues in dentistry, especially in orofacial pain.

Speaker 3  1:02:43  
So thank you. Yeah, a lot of you guys have, I mean, some of you that are trained as dentists have drills. I can only imagine that the sound of the drill it It bothers me, and I have very low degrees of fibromyalgia. But that, that, that, that could be a like, a diagnostic test that you start using,

Unknown Speaker  1:03:00  
quite frankly, associated, associative learning.

Unknown Speaker  1:03:04  
Yeah, there's a

Speaker 1  1:03:05  
there's a number of other questions. I'm just gonna in the last minute or two. I can

Speaker 3  1:03:11  
stay about five minutes after again. People can leave when they need to, but I can stay a little bit just,

Speaker 1  1:03:16  
I'm gonna go through these early on one of our question our attendees ask questions about statin statins and sort of as your rheumatological background, rheumatology background, statins and acute pain, but Mars and chronic pain, any relationships?

Speaker 3  1:03:33  
Yeah, it's one of the things you have to rule out before diagnosing someone with fibromyalgia, no plastic pain, because statins can cause sort of diffuse myalgias, but it's more so, like, that's like, we wouldn't call that nociplastic pain. We would say that statin induced myopathy, causing the pain.

Speaker 1  1:03:51  
So there's a question about small fiber neuropathy in quotes here, and the plasticity of dermatomal maps. Any intervention is helpful, but the questioner talks about biofeedback to change dermatomal map and is and with other pain syndromes, it's, it's, feels like a question about,

Unknown Speaker  1:04:11  
are we treating things peripherally or centrally here?

Speaker 1  1:04:15  
But any comments on adjunctive biofeedback treatments?

Speaker 3  1:04:20  
I think biofeedback can be helpful. It's on that list of non pharmacologic therapies. It has an evidence base. I don't think there's any evidence it's working by I don't think we know for sure how it's working, but I think it's working more centrally or spinal than peripherally, right?

Speaker 1  1:04:39  
A question about Hemi body, fibromyalgia, and the patient who has a brain,

Speaker 3  1:04:44  
yeah, we see this. I mean, typically it's more diffuse, but there are individuals where, you know, it involves, like, you know, a quarter of the body, or half of the body. This, as you all probably know, there's a whole set of sort of fun. Neurologic disorders that are probably variations on this, where it's, you know, people don't have the classic presentation of widespread pain. They have, like regional this or regional that. And I think many of them are sort of under this sort of continuum.

Speaker 1  1:05:15  
So quickly, the we talked about this before the talk a little bit, ketamine, low dose naltrexone, psilocybin, mestinon, all things that seem we seem to see happening in the clinic as patients come in every day. I

Speaker 3  1:05:33  
think those are all things that need continued research. I mean, certainly low dose naltrexone, there's several studies that suggest it might be helpful in fibromyalgia, we think it really it when it's working, it's actually sort of resetting the endogenous opioid tone, whereas other people think it might be working as a glial cell inhibitor. We just, we simply don't know. I think we're doing work with we just did a small pilot study of psilocybin and fibromyalgia, we're potentially excited about psychedelics. We're doing work with cannabinoids. You know, again, right now, people are using way too much THC. There's a lot of evidence that a very low amount of THC is better than a high amount of THC. That's a U shaped curve. And then a lot of our studies are looking at cannabidiol alone, or CBD. So I think these are all that mean, but they should all really be in the category of where we're still doing research. And these treatments, again, there's not a good enough evidence base, and there's a lot of the whole the literature on ketamine is just a hot mess.

Speaker 1  1:06:40  
Yeah, you can't drive down the highway without seeing advertisements for a ketamine clinic right now. So you think it's still some of it's experimental. Well,

Speaker 3  1:06:52  
it should be clear to the patients that it's experimental, and that, again, it'd be ideal if people were collecting data so we could actually learn from that experience.

Speaker 1  1:07:00  
Michael, you had a comment on opioids, and I can't kind of shut this down without letting use you.

Unknown Speaker  1:07:10  
Come in if you'd like. Are you there?

Speaker 1  1:07:17  
Michael, may not be there. Okay? Um,

Unknown Speaker  1:07:22  
well, go ahead. Michael, yeah,

Unknown Speaker  1:07:24  
thank you for the talk. Dan, um, my concerns that you talk about complementary, alternative medicine treatments not being particularly available outside places like the VA, the insurers have us by whatever, yet those seem to be the treatments that you seem are most you know, you see is most effective. So I'm not quite getting what we should be doing with these patients.

Speaker 3  1:07:49  
I I'm I'm just pointing out a problem, that there's a mismatch between what the evidence base now is and what treatments are reimbursed and readily available. One of the i I've tried to spend a lot of time on this, because I think it's one of the biggest problems in the field of pain, is the third party payer lack of reimbursement for a lot of non pharmacologic therapies. And one of the big problems is that a lot of the third party payers follow CMS, and in order for CMS to change its coverage, they have to have evidence in the patients that they cover, which is mainly, you know, the biggest part of their population is Medicare over 65 so because of that, the NIH has been intentional in some of the heal studies that have been funded in the last five or six years have specifically mandated that the studies have to be done in older individuals, so that those would help provide the data that CMS needed to change coverage decisions. So the the first condition this occurred in is osteoarthritis, where acupuncture, you know, became approved for use in osteoarthritis because the NIH funded some big studies in people over age 65 suggesting that it was effective. But that's there's there's a lot of problems with those therapies. There's problems in third party payers, credentialing the providers, and knowing, like, is someone qualified to give this therapy, this therapy, this therapy. Then there's scams of people, you know, like, all of a sudden you approve one of the therapies, and then there's people that are scamming the insurance company. So I'm not trying to make it out to be simple, to make these therapies more accessible, that there are legitimate issues, but it is at odds with what where the science and the evidence base is right now. The other thing that insurance companies do is, if you like, as a provider, if you try to challenge them and say, you know, I think Mrs. Jones should have access to non pharmacologic treatment A because, you know, the evidence base, the AHRQ report says that these, you know, this works in a number of chronic pain conditions, and what they'll often do is say, Well, it hasn't actually been shown to work in in that in sickle cell. Disease or it only has been shown to work in low back pain. And it's like, you know, the standard shouldn't be that each of these integrative therapies has to be shown to be effective in several RCTs in every pain condition. We should be able to take the evidence from conditions like osteoarthritis and chronic low back pain and extrapolate it more broadly. But that's the other trick that the third party players play, is they say there's no evidence for like for TMD. There may be, you know, that there's really no good RCTs in temporomandibular disorder for a bunch of those therapies that I had on the screen.

Unknown Speaker  1:10:38  
Well, since some in my department, insurers are paying progressively less for neuromodulation and making up all sorts of nice tales about that. And since you said opioids are no good, it sounds like soon many of these patients just will not be treated.

Speaker 1  1:10:55  
Okay, I know a number of questions here, and we have some raised hands, but folks are going to clinic, so I don't want to annoy too many folks. Dr cloud, this is an extraordinary presentation. Those who have questions, we could send out emails. We have many more questions than usual for today.

Speaker 3  1:11:15  
Yeah, I'll try to answer them by email, if you send me an email with the questions. So Okay,

Unknown Speaker  1:11:19  
thank you, Dr cloud, very much. This

Unknown Speaker  1:11:21  
is extraordinary for

Unknown Speaker  1:11:23  
us all, right. Well,

Unknown Speaker  1:11:25  
good seeing you all bye, bye,

Unknown Speaker  1:11:27  
okay, thank you, bye, bye, thank you, bye.

Transcribed by https://otter.ai
