Unknown Speaker  0:00  
Good morning, everyone. We're excited to have a tremendous, well known speaker here, and Dr Chapman will be introducing her, welcome to the interdisciplinary pain and headache grounds for today. As it gets closer to aid, I'll quickly scroll through our disclosures. Don't forget this weekend for oral facial pain, there's a case series from multiple oral facial pain training programs across the across the country and Canada, I believe, and Matt will be putting the link for that in the chat section. Remember that the chat section is for administrative content, and then ask Your questions in a question section for the speaker you

Unknown Speaker  1:38  
I have about a Minute to welcome while everybody's logging on, I'll be quickly going through the disclosures, and Dr Chapman will be assisting with the introduction to our speaker. Remember that the CE credits will be in the chat section. I'll give you the number in a second, but if there's any question, just look in the chat section. If you were unable to look or access the chat section because you're on a motorcycle somewhere and can't look at your phone, then

Unknown Speaker  2:13  
reach out to us

Unknown Speaker  2:16  
and we'll see what happens.

Unknown Speaker  2:21  
Okay, it's eight o'clock. I have right? Matt,

Unknown Speaker  2:26  
okay, we have no disclosures from an industry contact standpoint, although each of our speakers have individual disclosures which have been deemed irrelevant for the particular program, we don't hide things. No big surprises, not to summon the CE stuff that you may be elsewhere. We're have some really gracious, gracious funders here, several significant funders as well, and we'll be thanking, thanking those folks significantly. This is our disclosure slide note. Note in the top right for those 30% of you who'll be seeking continuing medical or continuing dental education, you you text in the Y, a H Y, a H Y, E, S here, and that will also be in the chat section if you're looking for it, to get your credit to fill out the appropriate forms rest of the disclosure slides, no relevant disclosures for Dr rich Senko,

Unknown Speaker  3:34  
okay. Again, we

Unknown Speaker  3:35  
have a clinical case series program this coming Wednesday, April 27 excited to have you there. In advance, the link will be put in by Matt. Thanks for Thanks for everyone, and I'm going to turn it over to you,

Unknown Speaker  3:54  
Matt and

Unknown Speaker  3:56  
Michael and Dr grossenko, if you could? I'm going to stop SlideShare. You could

Unknown Speaker  4:05  
put up your slides.

Unknown Speaker  4:13  
Okay, wonderful. I will introduce Dr gretsenko. Dr gretsenko is a professor in many departments, anesthesiology, family and social medicine and physical medicine and rehabilitation at Montefiore Medical Center in New York. She is the Fellowship Program Director of regional anesthesia and acute pain medicine and a core member of Montefiore multidisciplinary pain program. Dr pasenko is board certified anesthesiology pain medicine and Hospice and Palliative Care Medicine. She has a passion for teaching, and spends a significant portion of her clinical time with trainees, both in the chronic and acute pain settings. She has authored and lectured on topics relating to chronic pain. Regional anesthesiology and acute pain medicine. So she academically, she's extremely broad. She's received the American Society of interventional pain physicians Rising Star Award, outstanding pain physician of the year, and is noted in the New York Times Magazine list of super doctors. Most importantly, she believes in treating patients with compassion and professionalism. She's proud to be a wife and mother of four wonderful sons. Honored to introduce my dear friend and colleague, Dr Karina.

Unknown Speaker  5:37  
Thank you very much for that warm introduction, and it's so nice to meet you all virtually from all across the world, from so many different disciplines. And, you know, perspectives really on on the medical world. I was very excited to be invited to this, since there is the patient perspective, the physician perspective, and it's an interdisciplinary discussion, and ketamine certainly is interdisciplinary as well. So I was tasked with the discussion of the pros and cons, and not to be biased, but I will let you know that I do believe in ketamine, and so that's my first bias before I show you any slide, but I will still be critical of some of the data that does exist, and I will be cognizant of time, and I will make sure to leave time for questions, and I look forward to our vibrant conversation this morning. So with a little bit of introduction, if my slides move, there we go. This is Monte Medical Center. Again, I do wear a few different hats. The most important one is mom and wife. But in addition to that, almost equal to that, is my passion from my vocation. I split my time between working in the perioperative environment, in the regional anesthesia world, covering the Acute Pain Service as well as the other half of my life is spent working with chronic pain patients. And I have a fascination of the acute on chronic pain patient as well, and a love of ketamine. So what are we actually going to be talking about today? I want to be fair, and let me just go up for one moment. I have a special thank you to give to one of my fellows, Dominique Chang, who did help me put together with some of these slides. And I'm very fair about this. I want to give credit where she wears due when she graduates, wherever she will go, she will be a superstar. So today, we're going to talk a little bit about history pharmacology, ketamine in the acute pain world, ketamine in the chronic pain world, and then ketamine for depression and PTSD. Because I think one of the most exciting things about ketamine is it's kind of like salt. You can put it in a lot of different recipes, and it still can be very valuable. And, you know, I think there's been a lot of that other uses. So you know, it's not just one, one peg that goes into a specific hole. It can be a little bit ubiquitous if you know how to use the tool in your hand. So let's talk a little bit about the history of ketamine. What is this medication anyway, and where, how did it even kind of, how do we even start thinking about it? Well, in the 1950s there was a new system that was a new chemical, organic reaction that led to the synthesis of something called PCP. And initially it was planned to be a medical compound, but they kind of noticed that it causes increases in blood pressure and nystagmus, and it did maintain respiration, but then at the same time, there were a lot of severe excitation and for profound psychosis. Hence, when it became a drug of substance abuse, as opposed to an excellent tool for clinical care. But there was something there in the water, and so they found a new compound eventually that had all the positive qualities of PCP, without the major side effects and the severe excitation and the profound psychosis, and that was the one that was eventually called ketamine in 1964 it was used in veterinary medicine first, and it's still used today for veterinary medicine, it was noted to show an excited drunken state in rodents, but kind of a Cate leptoid state in pigeons. And the first human actually received it between 1964 and 1966 and there was a study of over 100 people that was noted and published, and they received these sub anesthetic IV doses, and patients were able to actually report talking about these strange experience of feeling like they were floating and having no arms or legs, and others felt like they were dead. And came back. Well, fast forward to 1970 Kennedy received FDA approval after appropriate clinical trials, and during the Vietnam War, it became actually a widely used anesthetic and wounded victims with hemodynamic instability. And now, if we look at today, it's a modern tool in our toolbox, and has been used in clinical practice for about more than 50 years. In 1985 it was actually. It named an essential medicine by the WHO and actually was thought to be one of the most common anesthetics in the world. You know, recently, due to the opiate crisis, which I'm sure my audience is, is highly aware about, there was a renewed interest in ketamine, both for the acute and chronic pain spheres, and we'll be talking about that as well in terms of more recent guidelines, and even more recently than that, even in the last five years, it was actually proved as a nasal spray for the treatment of new indications, such as resistant depression. It's also been used for other medical disorders such as anxiety and suicidal ideation. So, you know, there's a lot of publicity in this world. This is a sample of an anesthesia Patient Safety Foundation newsletter from June of 2020 it talked about the potential benefits and side effects of ketamine, and also the history of ketamine. It's important to appreciate the fact that you can maintain respiratory drive, minimize cardiovascular depression, attenuate opiate induced hyperalgesia, provided as an adjuvant, acute on chronic pain, choice as an adjuvant, and it actually has anti suicidal and antidepressant properties. On the flip side, you still had to pay attention to some of the negative negatives, such as increased airway secretions and minimizing airway reflux attenuation, it can still be a sympathetic in elevating your heart rate, your blood pressure. Patients who are close to an MI with severe CAD should be used with caution with this medication. And of course, the hallucinations, confusions, vivid dreams and delirium are possible. There are these classic YouTube and Tiktok videos of parents taking pictures of their kids after some kind of surgery on who have received ketamine, where they're a little bit laughing at their kids separate conversation. But you may have seen those kind of videos on the internet, also double vision and blurry vision, and so this was a nice little review piece here, because it was actually discussing some of the benefits to review this established but kind of underappreciated medication, which might be the theme of this talk. That being said, we have to speak with caution, because ketamine gained recent publicity in December of 2023 where it showed that a very famous actor in the social world of the US, Matthew Perry, who had been a character and friends for many years, died as a result of the acute effects of ketamine and subsequent drowning. He was known to have been using this medication for depression and anxiety. And it was noted, though, that outside of the weekly depression dosing, he might have had actually higher levels of ketamine in his system that was found in his post mortem assessment. Sadly, the death was ruled to be an accident. But you know this, this is something where we talk about the discerning eye of ketamine. So let's talk a little bit about the pharmacology of ketamine. Okay, what is this drug that's so powerful it does so many things? Well, there's a few antimers of it. It has RNs. Thank you. Organic Chemistry. The s anti antemer is actually considered about three to four times more potent than its cousin, and has a greater affinity for the PCP binding receptor. The S version has a shorter duration of action and possesses greater neuro protective and analgesic properties than its R component, which might actually potentially make it a more ideal analgesic. But preclinical and clinical analgesic studies comparing the two have thus kind of yielded conflicting data so far in terms of abuse, potential studies comparing the two antimers have also produced mixed results. But for depression, two animal studies did demonstrate more sustained anti depression effects for the R antiandre, but there's no really clinical studies to guide this. Just know that there are two directions that ketamine can take.

Unknown Speaker  14:00  
It's important to understand the mechanism of action, and this becomes a very important slide later on down the line. So one of the things, before we even look at any slides here, that I talk about with all of my trainees are that Pain Physicians have two roles. We are the electricians of the body, and we are also the chefs. So in terms of electricity, we understand that there are a lot of different receptors that exist in the human body, and so we have to figure out, when we're trying to attack the pain bomb, is it the yellow wire, the blue wire, the green water? What are we trying to actually address in order to cut the bomb so that the pain doesn't go off? Well, the primary mechanism of action when we talk about ketamine has to do with a non competitive antagonism at the PCP binding site of the NMDA receptor in the CNS, particularly in the prefrontal cortex and hippocampus, where it decreases the frequency of the channel opening and the time spent in the active open state. It's also important to appreciate how with a dose response, the ketamine act. Activating opioid receptors changes over time. So this becomes really important in our discussion, because we talk about sub anesthetic doses, anesthetic doses when we talk about CRPS, you know, people talk about half a milligram per kilogram in the perioperative state, and even when we're talking about the beginnings of treatment for CRPS. But if you go to the VA in the DC area. You know, those patients have been known to have ketamine coma infusions for their post amputation stump pain, and those are extremely high doses. So, you know, it's the opposite of the limbo. Not how low can you go, but sometimes how high can you go. And also an appreciation of the fact that the receptor stimulation will change depending on what is the dose that's being acquired. Also, the analgesic effects are not reversed by Naloxone, which is also a separate interesting concept here, because this might not be the source of the anti nociception. And also, when ketamine and Naloxone, there's there have been recent studies actually talking about ketamine and Naloxone for depression. So when they're trying to figure out how it works for other receptors, the antidepressant qualities of the ketamine are not reversed by Naloxone, which indicates that it's not just the NMDA receptor, but actually, in many discussions, there's a facilitation of on the third section, gabapentin, gabapentinoid type receptors. And so this might be where not only are we using it for analgesia, but where we're really exploring the other part of pain management, the the part of being an electrician of the human body, affecting the brain, affecting depression, anxiety. And so I think there's a lot of room here in the world of neuroscience to help with both analgesia, anxiety and other psychiatric comorbidities. So it's a very exciting drug that can be multi faceted in its usage. There's lots of roots of administration, IV, im, intranasal, topical, oral, rectal. One of the things we'll talk about later on is is, is money, because not everybody has access to ketamine. And I'll, I'll just say that in many of my patients in chronic pain, where I do think ketamine can be useful, sometimes I'll prescribe them a ketamine cream, just because I don't always have access to all of the other forms of ketamine for them in the outpatient setting. So just keep in mind that there's lots of ways to have ketamine administered to a patient. That being said, the bioavailability and distribution certainly vary, as you can see here, in this in this description, from im to I intranasal to PO. And so that's an important appreciation. It's really the active metabolite which has a 30% potency of ketamine. And metabolites are mainly excreted in the urine. So you really want to appreciate what is the root of administration and the distribution, the bioavailability, as you're choosing this medication, and in what form it's going to be given. And the half life is about two and a half hours or so. So again, important for After Effects, patients should not go home alone after this medication. Patients should have a supportive environment if they're going to be using these kind of medications. Okay, I briefly mentioned this before, but we do appreciate the fact that ketamine is a sympathomimetic effects. There's an increase in many of the cardiovascular typical descriptors. What's good is that the respiratory diminuation is quite low in this and so it is considered a good drug, that it can be a drug for difficult airways or for patients who have OSA need to be maintained is part of their anesthetic. It does increase the secretions, though, so it's recommended to give something against the secretions and and also, you will see patients with a very clear dissociative state due to this functional electrophysiological separation of their, of their, of their systems here. So while the eyes may remain open, pupils are dilated. Sometimes they're speaking to you, but sometimes they're not. As the dosage goes up, you know, patients have essentially, quote, unquote, dissociated from their body. And a little factoid is that one of this discovery, the discoverers of ketamine, his wife, actually named that that dissociative state always. Thank your wife. All right, that being said, we said all these interesting things about ketamine and all the things it does. What are the things that we don't like so much about ketamine? Well, it's certainly outside of secretions. Can cause post operative nausea and vomiting. It can cause emergence, delirium, hallucinations. It could cause weird and unpleasant dreams. Can be a little bit painful, and injection especially, and an overdose is associated with loss of consciousness. An overdose would cause respiratory depression and all of the cardiovascular effects and as well as severe psycho mimetic events, including positive and negative signs of schizophrenia. So these are things to just keep in the back of your mind. Of the negative part if we're going to criticize ketamine. Okay, I gave you a little bit of background on ketamine, a little history. We talked a little bit about the mechanics of it. Now let's talk about acute pain medicine. Okay, so in 2018 something relatively revolutionary happened because multiple societies came together and said, We're going to put a consensus statement on ketamine. And so the American Society of regional anesthesia and pain medicine, the American Academy of pain medicine and the ASA, or the American Society of Anesthesiologists, put a discussion on intravenous use of ketamine infusions out there in the world, and this is a PubMed practice guideline in one of the large pain medicine journals, or the regional anesthesia Pain Medicine Journal, as it's known. Speakers are from many that I know. They're wonderful people. They're from their leaders in the field. And so putting together a three society statement like this was considered a very powerful thing. Notice, this is 2018 we've been using this drug for 50 years, so maybe it's about time. But isn't it nice that we at least have somewhere to start from to kind of we have our first recipe book. So this was done in 2018 not so long ago.

Unknown Speaker  21:18  
So what's the summary of the guidelines. Well, sub anesthetic ketamine infusions should be considered for patients undergoing painful surgeries. This is Grade B recommendation with a moderate level of certainty. So there's some evidence that exists, as well as the consensus of the societies. Ketamine can be considered also for opiate dependent and opiate tolerant patients undergoing surgery, which is a very important topic, which we'll get into shortly, because the evidence is a little limited with case reports and series. You know, when we talk about specifically acute or chronic sickle cell pain, you know, while these patients suffer so much, in fact, Montefiore happens to be a sickle cell center. The grade recommendation is Class C, because we don't have the evidence behind it, and also for patients with sleep apnea, I mentioned it earlier, having may be considered as an adjunct to limit opiates. Again, Grade C recommendation because there's not enough data. Now, please keep in mind not enough data doesn't mean that it doesn't work. It just means that we have to prove it. Still perhaps I'll tell you I'm a strong believer in both of these in my clinical practice, but again, I need to show you the evidence, if I'm going to be fair in this conversation. Okay, remember what I talked about before? Salt can be a little bit or a lot. It affects the recipe. It affects the dosing. It affects what we do, depending on what is the purpose of the ketamine and in what context we're using, just like lidocaine and an epidural, there are changes in dosing suggestions, right? So whether it's an anesthetic induction, dose of bolus, dosing, analgesia, sedation, or treatment resistant depression, these are very clear different dosing. There's also these ketamine clinics that have been set up where people come in for a little short infusion, you know? And they do this a few times in a month or so, so. So there are many ways to use this drug. That being said, the literature does not support infusions above one milligram per kilogram per hour in a setting without intensive monitoring. Okay. So keep that in mind. Unfortunately, Matthew Perry may not have been in that, in that in that range individuals of pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics can also affect this, and so you might need to think about dosings either higher or lower I had. I remember when I was a fellow, many moons ago, one of my favorite patients was this Vietnam War veteran who unfortunately had a head and neck cancer and had been exposed to Agent Orange, and he had this tumor that was growing out of his neck, and was on this, these high doses of drugs. It was methadone at the time, but you know, that was his PCA, and no matter how much we gave him, he just was awake. So, you know, we do have to appreciate that there are extremes in all these situations. So these are guidelines, but they don't affect all patients. Adverse effects may also prevent you from getting as high as you want to in many cases. For the chronic pain world, when we're doing this, you might I used to run a continuous versat infusion in order to mitigate with some of the psycho mimetic effects. And we would also be doing serial lft testing to make sure, again, that there were no changes to that. We'll get into that a little bit later on. But again, the dose dependent reactions are limited by what you are trying to achieve, and also the limitations of the side effect profile for each patient. Okay, so what's the evidence to support ketamine infusions as an adjuvant to opioids and other therapies. Well, overall, it was concluded that there is moderate evidence to support sub anesthetic IV doses up to point three five milligrams per kilogram and for infusions up to one milligram per kilogram per hour as an adjuvant to opioids in the perioperative period. So at least we have pretty decent evidence that perioperatively can. I mean, is a good thing, okay? What about contraindications? Well, I kind of alluded to some of them, already very poorly controlled, cardiovascular disease, pregnancy, active psychosis, hepatic dysfunction and elevated intracranial pressure and elevated intraocular pressure. Does any evidence support ivpca for ketamine? Well, evidence is kind of limited in this area as a sole analgesic for acute and perioperative pain, so it's a grade C recommendation, low letter, low level of certainty, but there is moderate evidence to support the benefit of addition of ketamine as an opiate based ivpca For acute and perioperative pain management, Grade B evidence. So there's good literatures to support that. Keep in mind, again, you have to have appropriate staff and monitoring on the on the floors for these kind of patients. So there are other aspects in terms of systems based practice that need to be considered for perioperative management, including ketamine. Okay, we talked a little bit about intranasal and there is some literature, but it's still great to see evidence, at least for patients who have difficult IV access, or children who are going procedures in terms of oral ketamine. If we look at the guidelines from 2018 that the evidence was less robust, but small studies and anecdotal reports suggested it might provide a short term benefit in some individuals with acute pain. And so this was a grade C recommendation, but one of the things I'm proud to tell you, which was just published one week ago, and actually the senior author on this was my old fellow who is now director of pain in Albany, Eric Silverman, they did a recent study in combination with Jefferson, with Eric, combining oral administered ketamine and the post operative opiate use in colorectal surgery. And this was a retrospective cohort, but they were able to show that there were fewer readmissions and that there was a preservation of reduced perioperative opioid use, suggesting an opiate sparing effect. It's not a perfect study. Obviously. There was an insignificant loss of length of stay change. There were no observed increase in ICU admissions, which is great, but I think this is a pretty exciting discussion since the institution's initiation of eras pathways in 2019 after the original studies came out. So here we go. We have more promising data, and this is from one week ago, so this is at recent as it gets Okay, so let's just briefly talk about a few questions. Who are the patients that we can treat Well, patients who are opiate tolerant, patients who are opiate naive, patients who are in the perioperative setting. Where can we treat patients well? Infusions are great, as I mentioned before, but outside of the operating room setting, or, you know, maybe a little bit challenging here, perioperatively, pacu ICU settings may be wonderful locations, but we still have to keep in mind all the potential side effects. So they do need to be an appropriate moderate setting, whatever that is at your institution, and what's the right dose. I think that there, again, depending on what the purposes of the ketamine, there are different dosing. There's not exactly a clear dose related dependent relationship because of also the second memetic effects. But there's things to explore in this area. Okay, as we transition our discussion between acute to chronic pain. We do have to at least make mention of persistent post surgical pain. Ppsp, new, new, new definition, old concept, the people who are acute pain or acute pain people, the people who are chronic pain, people as as classically defined as patients who have pain for more than three months are chronic pain people. What are those middle range people that are a little bit like, it's kind of prolonged, but it's not perfect, and we got to figure out, you know, they have a little bit more pain they're supposed to, and they're still bothering their surgeon after whatever procedure. And obviously this affects breast, this affects knee, this affects, you know, many different pathways. And so there's, there's been a an increase in the exploration of these areas. And this is just a few little samples from the regional anesthesia and Pain Medicine Journal of studies that have been put out there discussing random, prospective observational studies, cross sectional survey analysis, perspective of observational study again. And so I think it's just at least important to appreciate the fact that this is a hot topic and that we are starting to put a little focus on it. So what about post surgical, persistent pain and ketamine? Is there a future? Well, the individual studies are underpowered at this point in time. There is a meta analysis that showed a very small effect. The number needed to treat of 12 at three months and 14 at six months. So we still have to do a little bit better in this area. But you know, it's worth the exploration, and this is part of also where different versions of ketamine, especially intranasal, might continue to be useful for these acute on chronic pain episodes that's been mostly studied in the. Emergency Medicine setting, where it provides benefit briefly, but potent, especially good for procedures, but in terms of this persistent pain that exists for long term use, the jury's still out, and hopefully we'll be exploring that further.

Unknown Speaker  30:16  
Okay? And I think another thing that's very nice is that this is a global phenomenon, so this is just a sample of a five year study current, currently going on outside of the US. So I think it's important to recognize that we are thinking about this, these kind of studies all over the world. Okay, we talked a little bit about acute pain. We talked a little bit about history of ketamine. Now let's briefly talk about chronic pain. So chronic pain, which is my love. There's also consensus guidelines on chronic pain and ketamine. Again, same three societies. They also put out discussions many of the same authors, as you'll note here, since there are other people who wear these multiple hats of acute to chronic pain, and you know, ketamine IV infusions have been have been in existence for some time. When we think about what we know for sure, I mentioned being part of a CRPS center. So that is one of those areas where there is definite, moderate certainty, of evidence for ketamine infusions, and it's been shown to provide pain relief for up to 12 weeks. We can see here. Here's a sample of somebody with a CRPS syndrome of the foot. And I myself have been able to have the luxury of witnessing these patients from before and after their infusions, and then visiting us in the hospital afterwards. And you know, once you see it, you believe it. So I drink the Kool Aid for chronic pain patients for many other reasons, neuropathic pain, fibromyalgia, cancer pain, ischemic pain, migraine pain, low back pain. Unfortunately, there's still weak or no evidence really to support those uses. But I'm, I'm a personal believer. I just can't present to you that data today based on the 2018 guidelines. Okay, so what's the summary? CRPS is great, and everything else is dot, dot, dot. Well, excluding CRPS, there's no real evidence to support ketamine for intermediate or long term pain relief in those situations, there is low, low certainty evidence supporting oral ketamine as a follow up therapy after ketamine infusions. And there's also oral ketamine can be associated with high abuse potential and should be prescribed cautiously, right? So when we use it with the intranasal ketamine for breakthrough pain, it's it has some moderate evidence there, but it can be used for short term actin. So what do we really do with all of this? It's a little bit confusing, right? So we know it kind of works in the short term. We know it works for CRPS, but everything else, the waters are a little bit mucky at this point in time, even though Dr bersenko is telling you it's great, there are certain pain populations at the same time where ketamine should be considered for infusion therapy, well, for spinal cord injury, there is weak evidence supporting infusion rates ranging from 17 minutes to five hours for seven days, for short term improvements of pain, for CRPS, we talked about it that one, we feel like we can put a grade B checkmark recommendation for mixed neuropathic pain syndromes, like all the ones I mentioned right now, weak or no evidence, at least for immediate improvements of pain, grade D, unfortunately. So excluding CRPS, there's no real evidence supporting all these chronic pain and intermediate, long term improvements of pain. What are we going to do with that? Well, let's also talk about the contrary indications to continue this Debbie downward movement. Well, the contraindications are similar for acute pain and serial ketamine infusion should not be taken in patients who have active a substance abuse problem, and should be used along with universal cautions with regards to abuse, that's grade C evidence. Okay, so, and we've seen people who unfortunately have suffered the sequelae of ketamine. Okay, the other part of ketamine is it's really expensive, well, so this is from 2022 and this is a discussion from the Azra pain societies, and they talk about how expensive it is, so there's no FDA approved real indication for these infusions as a treatment modality, and the data has shown growing evidence that, you know, we don't really know exactly what we're doing here, so maybe we shouldn't pay for it. So I can tell you where I was, in one of my prior institutions, there were a lot of people there who had money, and so because of that, the numbers didn't quite matter so much, and they were able to have these seven day stays and to have these high dose treatments, and that wasn't really an issue. Many of them were lucky to have amazing results. That being said, this is not somebody, this is not a treatment that has equity, because insurance companies are not equal and this, this is not something where all patients can have access to this treatment. And I think that that's one of the things that also limits its exploration at this stage of the game. So is there any evidence for supporting. In therapeutic dose cutoff thresholds, infusion rates or higher doses. Maybe, if we give them a lot more, you know, maybe, maybe that'll make it better. Well, there's is moderate evidence to support higher dosage of ketamine over longer periods of time and more frequent in administration for chronic pain. So great. So if we can just get them the drug, give them more of it and do it more frequently, maybe we're gonna have better data there. There's similar strategies used for opiates and other analgesics with significant adverse effects, though, so it's reasonable to start with a single outpatient infusion and then kind of reassessing treatment. And so that's a great see evidence of great we can kind of titrate it up, but if we don't have access to the drug, and if it doesn't help everyone, there's, there's, there's some, there's some holes in this, in this road that we're trying to travel upon. So is there any role for oral ketamine? Okay, so IV infusions are kind of meh. We're not perfect here. What about oral or other NMDA receptor antagonisms as a follow up for treatment in rule of in lieu of repeat infusions? Well, there's low level support of oral ketamine and other NMDA receptor antagonism as a follow up therapy. There's moderate evidence to talk about intranasal and then also the oral ketamine still has significant abuse potential and street value. So you know, do we really want to be adding this to the waters of what exists in the in the common world, used with caution, and then also considering the cost and resources, it's kind of complicated, so at least we might want to consider these intranasal, oral and other treatments in lieu of serious treatment, at least that one is at least Grade B evidence, because the other stuff is so expensive and complicated to organize that maybe we can at least look at those other routes and begin to explore that more. So I'm encouraging this conversation, even outside of today's Grand Rounds. Okay, so let's just say that we have the ketamine Great. What tests should be ordered prior to an infusion of ketamine? Well, there's insufferative evidence about this as well. So pre infusion testing, we're not really sure what we need to do for the healthy person who's just starting this out, individuals at higher risk of cardiovascular events might might consider, you know, baseline ECG testing, you know, to exclude individuals with uncontrolled ischemic disease that we didn't know about and invasion in patients with baseline liver dysfunction who are alcoholics or people with chronic hepatitis or who are expected to receive very high doses of ketamine at frequent intervals, you know, basic and post infusion liver function tests should be considered, and that's grade C evidence all of this, as I mentioned in my in my clinical practice, we did do those kind of testing, but it's still grade C evidence. What training is prudent for patients who, for personnel, excuse me, who administer boluses and infusions and oversee titrations. Well, you know, ketamine doses, again, they vary, and so it's important to understand and see who these patients are and have appropriate follow up. Patients who are older might have different thresholds, so they might need different monitoring. Higher cutoffs with sub anesthetic doses may also be utilized, and so again, need to be recognized. But the basics of monitoring include hemodynamic and respiratory parameters, and they remain irrespective of the route of administration or dosing. We have to make sure these patients are okay, and of course, with that, we have to make sure there's availability of personnel and equipment for resuscitation at all times, and that is Grade C evidence. So no matter what happens, Grade A evidence is be safe and be prudent. What about what about preemptive medications for administration as rescue drugs. There's limited direct evidence support of the preemptive use of benzodiazepines, and no evidence to support antidepressant, antihistamine and anticholinergic pre medications. This is Grade C evidence. I do think, in my clinical practice, what we've always done is started the ketamine, and then, if needed, started the benzodiazepine, but there are times when they're started simultaneously, especially if they are patients that have had multiple rounds of this. There might be an expected reaction and expected dose dosing of this, and did recipe, but the recommendation preemptively is still grade C. So what constitutes a positive treatment response? Well, if we look at the refractory nature of this disease, a positive outcome was actually considered to be 30% greater or greater relief in conjunction with patient satisfaction. And as we can appreciate, you know, patient satisfaction is very hard in the chronic pain patient. On the flip side, 30% could be like a placebo effect. So what really is that? But you know, this is what the definition is discussed at in terms of duration of benefit, greater than 30 weeks as a single outpatient infusion, and greater than six weeks following an inpatient or series of infusions are considered reasonable delay. Aniations,

Unknown Speaker  40:01  
similar to multiple guidelines for epidural injections, conservative series of infusions should not be administered by root but rather tailored to the patient response. So patients should not be treated all the same, not one size fits all, but should be, you know, really titrated to the person, and considering the long term risks of ketamine, limiting to no more than six to 12 treatments per year is reasonable, so I think deviations can be made as well many times. We didn't do it that way necessarily, but that's grade C evidence and also still under discussion. Okay, so another thing that kind of gets exciting is all of these different receptors. So both in acute pain and chronic pain, there are lots of prevalence of rates of surgery and acute pain and post traumatic pain. And so I think there's a lot of room for further studies in this area. I want to make sure we have enough time for questions. This is a pain faculty talking about the use of non cancer pain outside of the US, and so again, it's being studied across the world. Reminder that there are many different sample infusion rates, and this is another one from halfway across the world. This is from Dr Cohen, who is not too far from us and recently moved institutions talking about his sample rates. And then I briefly want to touch on depression and make sure we have enough time for questions. I promised myself and promised at my my colleagues, that I would be on time and I will be so. I think this is an exciting subtopic, just to whet your appetite, remember that anybody who has depression, 1/3 of patients with chronic pain have concurrent psychiatric comorbidities such as depression, and so you wonder how much of these pathways overlap each other. There are clinical trials that have talked about ketamine for depression, for prevention of PTSD, the primary effects were thought to be part of the NMDA receptor, but actually may be part of these other glutamate pathways. May be affecting the gabapentinoid pathways, and there's a lot of beginnings of discussions on this topic. And if you're interested, I highly recommend there's a DR Huberman who is from Stanford in California, and he does these wonderful podcast type YouTube videos discussing these topics. He's an excellent speaker. And if you have a fascination in this specific subtype area, I highly recommend him. I don't know him, but I think his videos are great. So you know, what's interesting about ketamine for depression is, again, we're the electricians of the human body. We're playing with the NMDA receptor. We're trying to change that glutamate surge there, mother, there are a number of things that are modulated in the brain, and then there's an increase of gabapentin, GABA B levels. And so isn't it exciting that there can be this cascade of effects that have been noted to have serial surges and might actually be able to affect this state as well for post operative depression, it's been controversial, to be fair, the studies are still not 100% I clearly drink the Kool Aid. But please, let me be fair. In my conversation in 2023 there was a meta analysis of 15 studies that discussed perioperative ketamine, reducing post operative depression, increased risks, such as nausea, vomiting, hallucinations. In a double randomized blind trial, ketamine was given to 210, patients undergoing C section with spinal anesthesia, and the ketamine did not reduce their depression at one, two or four weeks post operatively. And you know, post postpartum depression is something that exists in 2021 ketamine was given to neurosurgery patients undergoing intracranial tumor resection, and this trial did show that ketamine could reveal moderate to severe depression in neurosurgical patients. So you know, we're kind of poking in the waters in this area, but I think there's a lot of room to keep digging. So these are a few references, and then, most importantly, this is my family. And so I leave you with the thoughts of, may you always have a purpose to do better as a person and as a professional, for your vocation, your ethics and your life choices, and this is the reason I do what I do. And with that, thank you very much. I'm on time, gentlemen and ladies, I have five minutes left for question. I'm going to stop sharing my slides.

Unknown Speaker  44:15  
Ah, thank you. Thank you very much. Karina, what a wonderful, well balanced presentation. We are going to have some questions here. First, I want to have Dr Coolidge ask his question.

Unknown Speaker  44:34  
This is a wonderful talk. I mean, it was very it was great to see you sort of balance the data and the challenges that go on here, I have a two part question. The first, if you know, look at other treatments for pain, pain is a complicated area. If we look at spinal some something simple, I think they're simple, like spinal comp stimulation, and there's a required so. Ecological screening and assessment for folks with spinal column stimulation, which may be overkill. If we look at the guidelines for from the anesthesia society and other societies for ketamine, there's actually somewhat scant attention to assessing in any formal way of substance use risk with patients. I know it's considered, but it's just not in the guideline. And that's kind of surprising to me. That's sort of the first part of the question, what are your thoughts about that?

Unknown Speaker  45:35  
I think I want to you faded out for a minute, but I think you asked me about the not including ketamine in the discussion for substance abuse, is that what you said? Because

Unknown Speaker  45:43  
in some simple things, like spinal column stimulation, there's a standard psych assessment. If you look at the guidelines for ketamine, there's no given some risk factors. There's really no assessment of substance use risk, substance use disorder in any of the things. And just where's it is. It's a little surprising that that got missed in the field.

Unknown Speaker  46:06  
I think you're right, but I think also, and now I'll be a little bit of a Debbie Downer while I think it's great and I have access to ketamine in the perioperative setting quite easily. Sometimes it's so hard for me to get it nowadays in the chronic pain setting for financial reasons, insurance reasons, that it almost becomes like a null point half the time. I hate to say it that way, but I agree with you. It should be part of the assessment, part of the discussion. You know, that's why we're talking about

Unknown Speaker  46:33  
it today. Well, along the same lines, just just real quickly as we're talking, just along the lines of diversion. And, you know, very thorough talk, you didn't mention sort of the issue of diversion and sort of what's going on in the wild west of ketamine therapy. And I just opened up. I just Googled ketamine therapy, and it comes up mind bloom, ketamine therapy, psychedelic therapies. Here, 85% of clients receive improvement in anxiety, depression and pain by on by ketamine online, new life, ketamine at home, therapy. It is crazy out there in terms of what our colleagues are doing in terms of selling this on an open market, and that

Unknown Speaker  47:16  
is, I wish. I wish, code on this subject matter. Yeah, you know, there's a, if you ever saw the movie, or the movie, there was a, there's a documentary, and then it's on YouTube too, called the opiate Express. And it talked about this, and this was like 10 years ago, 15 years ago at this point in time, but it talked about how everybody went down to Florida, right to Broward County to get there, to get there, to get their classic pills. And they'd hire somebody for a day and have these pill mills and all of that. And one of the things that it teaches you there is how to trick a pain doctor into giving you meds. And so there's actually, if you Google this and you say, how to trick a pain doctor into giving you meds, like on Reddit, on one of these things, it's they'd say, this is what you do. You come in, you say, this hurts, that hurts and and then, don't worry, you'll get your pills. Well, I mean, that happens probably with marijuana, with ketamine, with with anything else that drugs that can be legally prescribed. So you're I politely alluded to it with the death of a famous person, and I politely alluded it to the fact that this exists in the world. Maybe I didn't emphasize it enough, but 100% it's there. And anybody can abuse anything. People can use, you know, glue and other things too. And I definitely think it has risk potential, but I do also believe that for the right patients, it can make a lot of wonderful life changing

Unknown Speaker  48:46  
benefit, but they are formally selling it online. They're wrong. They're wrong.

Unknown Speaker  48:51  
I mean, if we look at also marijuana, there are many places where it's not standardized, right, the concentration, the dosing, there's there's a lot of discussion on marijuana subjects as well, but it's we're not perfect, and the world is businessy. And I tried to present more of the scientific literature today, but in the real world, you're totally right. There's a lot of this going on.

Unknown Speaker  49:12  
Thank you. Along along those lines, Karina, a little bit over a year ago, Jeff good and Dan at University of Miami and I published the paper on an editorial expressing our concerns about the ketamine infusion centers that are wonderful money makers, but we describe them as the wild west in that we know nothing about dosing. We just know almost nothing. What are your thoughts on these very expensive, very profitable ketamine infusion centers that are popping up all over the place.

Unknown Speaker  49:49  
You're leading the witness, Michael, but I will tell you this, you know, there was an amazing also cash business center in Las Vegas. I. Of, you know, like banana boat, you know, patients, basically people. What happens in Vegas, stays in Vegas. And these trucks would go around, and all they would do is basically give people sailing and they would to rehydrate them after they were severely intoxicated, and they would charge $1,000 for a bag of saline. It was an incredibly profitable business because they rehydrated patients and prevented them from going to the EDS. If people can make a buck, they probably will. Is there a wild west? 100% there is? Should we discount the fact that this could be a valuable tool done correctly? No, we just have to maybe police it a little bit better and not be in the wild west.

Unknown Speaker  50:39  
I think that's an excellent answer. My other question, before I go to some of the other questions that have been asked by the attendees, what are your thoughts on on the fact that you know insurance, not in our lifetimes, will pay for ketamine, because insurance doesn't want to pay for anything, and it becoming a treatment available to the wealthy suffer from pain and not for others.

Unknown Speaker  51:05  
I hope that with appropriate data and studies like we should do with anything that will determine what the FDA approves. You know, I can have a longer conversation about this. I was lucky enough many years ago to spend some time lobbying in Congress and on Capitol Hill, and, you know, being part of that, that world where little interns would chase around people from the West Wing, for those people who know that show from many years ago, and they would like while the senator was walking by, sometimes with a medical background, most of the time without, they would just kind of give a few bullet points about something and a decision would be made, right? Or the lobbying that happened in those like, you know, 15 minute meetings over coffee, well, you know, I think until it affects somebody personally and their family, or until there's an appropriate push, or there's appropriate money in lobbying, nothing gets approved and nothing gets changed. And in the post COVID world, where there's so many health care shortages, about even the the the IVs that you have, or the basic medications that you're used to having. This is an uphill battle in heart, and hopefully that will allow us to have better scrutiny as we decide what we are going to put our stamp on.

Unknown Speaker  52:15  
Okay, thank you. Good question. Good. Good response. I'm going to get some of the attendees questions. First one, does ketamine have addictive properties like opioids?

Unknown Speaker  52:27  
Well, if it's interestingly enough, if we look at the psychiatric effects of ketamine, the lasting of that is a few weeks. So the chronic, long term effects, in terms of actual modulation of receptors is unknown. Does it feel good and do people want to use it routinely? Yeah. I mean, we just talked about the fact that it has street value, and we just googled that. So, you know, of course, people want that. I can't tell you what the statistic the evidence are about this today, but it's definitely something of concern.

Unknown Speaker  53:02  
Okay, thank you. Have another question from Dr Jeff Schafer from Harvard Dental. Thoughtful question. It seems that the beneficial response to ketamine is short term in some patients with a number needed to needed to treat being three months is six, but the number needed to treat at 14 months, or is 14 and six months, can you predict that a patient might develop tolerance, and if so, do you increase levels of ketamine or discontinue use of ketamine,

Unknown Speaker  53:35  
being that I drink the Kool Aid, I would increase the doses of ketamine as long as There were no side effects, but I would have to gage the whole package and the whole picture to that conversation, you know, unless I see some kind of weird, like hyperalgesia type thing going on that I think is a, maybe a separate topic, I like to even with gabapentin, you know, just because somebody tries 100 milligrams, I'm not going to stop there. I'm going to assess the full range of the drug before I discount it and cross it off my mess, because I hate to throw away a drug that I already have. So I want to learn about the patient's reaction to it first. I think that's probably my answer to that one. But you know, it depends on the patient.

Unknown Speaker  54:21  
Okay, thank you.

Unknown Speaker  54:22  
If I think there's no abuse potential, then obviously that's a different conversation, right,

Unknown Speaker  54:27  
right. Got another question from my buddy, will Almer quay, who's a pain Pharm D down Florida, and that is what pain doses of ketamine, have you seen personally in practice that elicited the least amount of emergence reactions?

Unknown Speaker  54:49  
So

Unknown Speaker  54:51  
the highest dose of ketamine that I've ever done in the clinical setting might be 100 or one. 15 milligrams, not milligrams per kilogram per hour, more than one or two milligrams per kilogram per hour, so maybe, like two milligrams per kilogram per hour in an infusion setting, in the perioperative space, though, okay with the chronic pain patient that might be tolerant to opiates. I don't have a VA with a controlled nursing unit or a fancy Jefferson like ketamine on the floor, post operative, acute pain world, like Schwenk and Viscusi, do not my clinical care setting. So I while I drink the Kool Aid I have, I don't have, I don't have the ability to do that. So I could do it in my pacu. I could do it for less than 24 hours, because I'm certainly not going to keep my patients in the pacu. But I have actually I have actually taken care of like CRPS patients, for example, who are being brought in for gyn surgery. And so we have purposefully kept them in the in the pacu for a day or two, and run high doses ketamine, and kind of treated their both acute and chronic pain in those settings, in

Unknown Speaker  55:59  
those situations. Does insurance pay for the prolonged pacu state? This

Unknown Speaker  56:04  
is part of their clinical care. Their pain is not controlled. But this is very rare. This is not, you know, this is thinking outside of the box. You know, I have this gentleman who's had two spinal cord stimulators that were botched up from outside people, and he comes to me, and I, I tried to, I couldn't get him an intrathecal pump. And I said, you have neuropathic pain. You're not going to have another spinal cord stimulator, you know. And it's not like a peripheral stim candidate. He was somebody who was like, such a good candidate. And I called up, I'm in New York. I'm supposed to be in a, you know, like a metropolitan hub of ketamine, accessing people, right? And he had regular Medicare, Medicaid, and is the nicest man in the world, which automatically means he's not going to get what he needs. And so I called up all of my friends at all the big hospitals, and we couldn't find a way to get him ketamine. So, you know, it doesn't always work. The system does. The system is flawed, and this is like the perfect candidate. Doesn't want to be on opiates, wants to work, uses a cane, two spinal cord stimulators, head back surgery. Has neuropathic pain all over, you know, like he needs some help, and so other than titrating up drugs, what else am I going to do for him? And I do periodic sympathetics.

Unknown Speaker  57:23  
Okay? Thank you.

Unknown Speaker  57:25  
You know, personally they in my practice when I practiced out in Seattle, the one patient I had who received ketamine infusions was a post stroke central shoulder pain patient, and he did brilliantly. He did actually brilliantly. It

Unknown Speaker  57:45  
worked. So I had a patient who was a young physical therapist who had a shoulder surgery, and in the end, she had ended up having 11 shoulder surgeries. Why because she kept getting infected? Why because they found out she had a stupid compliment syndrome, and this poor young woman ended up having the classic crypts. You saw, her arm was exactly what you don't want a young, 28 year old to have. And she would get these infusions. And you know, she had other things happen to her, but after her ketamine infusions, her arm looked normal. So like you know, when you see patients like that have such tremendous results, that just means we have to get good patient selected to treat people that need the treatment, right? You know, if you have soup, maybe don't use a knife. You got to use the right tool in order to Eat your soup.

Unknown Speaker  58:34  
I like that. I like that. So I have another question here from one of our attendees, one of our colleagues. And he pointed out, in my limited experience with IV ketamine, I had a couple of patients with either chronic musculoskeletal pain or chronic post surgical neuropathic pain with the previous history of opioid use disorders, and this is a group that seems not to do, not to be responsive to just about anything, but they did respond to IV ketamine is there? Are there any data for the treatment of chronic pain with ketamine in patients with previous histories of substance use disorders? Well,

Unknown Speaker  59:10  
when you talk about chronic myofascial pain, the classic pain doctor cringes and is afraid of fibromyalgia. I am a believer in fibromyalgia, and so the first thing I think of as Cymbalta and and kind of following along that pathway. But to be to be clear, even when we think about patients who have fibromyalgia, they have clear NMDA receptor changes with upregulation of those receptors. So to use a medication like ketamine can be valuable in that, as long as you can get it paid for,

Unknown Speaker  59:40  
right? So

Unknown Speaker  59:44  
one question comes up,

Unknown Speaker  59:47  
why is there such limited research on ketamine? Because people like you, who are, you know, amazing Pain Physicians on you know, as you say, you drank the Kool Aid. You've drunk the Kool Aid. And have great faith in it, and many others. You know, you're not alone. Those who are big believers. What is the issue with the research?

Unknown Speaker  1:00:10  
I think, well, I have four kids, so I limit myself research I can do and dedicate my time to. But in all seriousness, I think there's a lot of stuff that's that is that we could study that isn't fully studied yet. You know, we even talked about cannabis earlier. I do think that part of the fact that they're exploring depression is is something novel and new in the last five years. And I think that, you know, people are interested in the new and in the different and new applications and new tools and research is hard, and I maybe we should do more,

Unknown Speaker  1:00:49  
right? But I think that there are a lot of people would like to do more. What do you see as the obstacle at this point?

Unknown Speaker  1:00:58  
Money, time, focus? You know, for a few years we were focused on COVID and vaccines. For a few years, we've been focused on just the opiate pandemic and trying to prove opiates are bad long term, or like collecting data on addiction. And you know what's going on in that world? People are focusing on spinal cord stimulation. You know, there is money in this industry, but I just don't think it's been done yet. Maybe we should

Unknown Speaker  1:01:25  
right, and the money seems to be being made by the infusion centers that are making bank, and no one's regulating them. So why would they be motivated to do the research unless they're being regulated and with demands for research.

Unknown Speaker  1:01:45  
Well, if they do a study and it proves that it doesn't work, I don't think they're going to like that study very much.

Unknown Speaker  1:01:52  
That's a very good point. Maybe that's why we don't see head to head studies of one spinal cord stimulator against another of anything. Yeah, right, right. You know the truth shall set thee free. You know kind of thing. But I think a lot of people, you know, in the words of Jack Nicholson, you want the truth, you can't handle the truth.

Unknown Speaker  1:02:16  
Michael, this is and both of you, this is true for all areas of pain. I mean, if we look at epidural steroids, and we look at the data, and people have sort of done the studies, I mean, there are a lot of things that may not work very well, and there might not be an incentive to study them, because they currently are, are part of our crazy armamentarium,

Unknown Speaker  1:02:38  
right? And with the spinal cord stimuli, spinal cord stimulation, for example, you have, you know, national health services in Australia, for example, that did the hatchet job and spinal cord stimulation that didn't involve any pain physicians as researchers, but a bunch of physiotherapists, and they cherry picked the literature, and they came up with the answer, oh, spinal cord stimulation doesn't work for chronic pain, and then that allowed the Australian National Health Service, which was facing bankruptcy, to no longer cover spinal cord stimulation. So indeed, it is a very, very corrupt world. Another question out there from Dr Schaeffer, who asked about the number needed to treat, and the short term impact what constitutes an adequate trial period for Academy.

Unknown Speaker  1:03:31  
You know, I briefly talked about the slides talking about what's a good enough number, and they set them 30% this and that, and I criticize that myself. Those are what the consensus guideline expert said. I'm just one person, so I can't speak bigger than that, but I'll just leave it in, in their hands, with with some with some scrutiny. Okay,

Unknown Speaker  1:03:56  
I think we've reached on nine o'clock. Want to thank you again for a wonderful, stimulating and nicely balanced talk, I guess, as balanced as any talk on something like ketamine can be. But you did a really wonderful job with the literature on thank all the attendees and the certainly the the staff who puts this together, Ron, is there anything else that you want to say you're muted?

Unknown Speaker  1:04:34  
Okay, apparently not, because he's not unmuting. Karina, thank you again. I will talk to you soon. Everyone have a have a good week. Take care.

Unknown Speaker  1:04:44  
Thank you for inviting me.

Unknown Speaker  1:04:45  
Thanks so much. Kerry, you.

Transcribed by https://otter.ai
